The demand for flights to nearly every major US city fell this year, providing further evidence that Donald Trump’s presidency has put people off visiting the country.

Data from the flight search website Kayak found that British interest in four cities (Philadelphia, San Francisco, Orlando and Las Vegas) fell by at least 10 per cent compared with 2016, while demand for flights to a further eight - including New York and Los Angeles - dropped by five per cent or more.

The only US cities bucking the trend are Houston and Denver – neither of which could be considered mainstream options for UK travellers.

It adds to the weight of evidence that the incumbent US president is doing little to increase his country’s appeal among holidaymakers – the fall in visitors has even been labelled the “Trump slump”.

Just how bad is the slump?

Official figures show that this year, while international travel has been growing around the world, America’s total overseas arrivals have fallen by 5.3 per cent year-on-year, while arrivals from the UK are down 6.3 per cent. This decline might not sound vast, but it is significant, costing the US economy up to £140m a week, according to the Global Business Travel Association.

Given Trump’s efforts to ban citizens from Muslim-majority countries, it will be no surprise to learn that arrivals from the Middle East and Africa have plummeted furthest, by 30.2 per cent and 26.2 per cent, year-on-year, respectively. Mexico’s residents also have good reason to boycott the US, and it appears they are, with a 6.1 per cent fall in visits.

Interest in New York has also fallen Credit: This content is subject to copyright./WIN-Initiative

The slump has also been profound in Eastern Europe (arrivals from the region are down 11.9 per cent), South America (down 13 per cent), Central America (down 10 per cent) and the Caribbean (down 13.8 per cent). Only the Asian market has not seen a drop.

For those still keen to visit the US, there’s good news. The falling demand means cheaper airfares. Kayak’s research found that average prices for flights to 13 of 16 key US cities had fallen by as much as 19 per cent.

Where are Britons going instead?

If fewer people are visiting the US, where are they going instead? America’s neighbours, for starters. Canada, according to World Tourism Organisation figures, is anticipating a 6.7 per cent year-on-year increase in arrivals for 2017. To the south, Mexico is looking at a 9.9 per cent boom.

Kayak highlighted a surge in demand for destinations closer to home, too.

Searches for flights to Gibraltar, Toulouse, Paris, Hamburg and Krakow, for example, are all up by more than a third, year-on-year. It suggested Gibraltar’s growing popularity (up 56 per cent, more than any other destination) was down to significant coverage in the UK media – the vote for Brexit reignited the debate about the status of the British Overseas Territory.

Beyond Europe, Punta Cana in the Dominican Republic (up 44 per cent), Manila (up 32 per cent), Delhi (up 21 per cent) and Casablanca (up 19 per cent) are also finding greater favour among Britons.

Several Australian cities, including Brisbane, Melbourne and Perth, have also seen a rise in interest, a trend that could be down to the ongoing Ashes cricket series.

Are other destinations suffering?

According to Kayak’s research, demand has dipped sharply - by 38 per cent - for flights to Copenhagen. The firm suggested an increase in average prices of 63 per cent had contributed to the fall, along with competition from its Scandinavian neighbours.

Globally, the Maldives (down 43 per cent), Dubai (down 24 per cent), Kuala Lumpur (down 23 per cent) and Hong Kong (down 20 per cent) are also on the wane.

Where are prices rising and falling?

Besides Copenhagen, average prices have risen to several European destinations, including Milan (up 26 per cent), Zadar in Croatia (up 38 per cent), Dublin (up 33 per cent) and Corfu (up 39 per cent). They have fallen furthest for flights to Toulouse (down 49 per cent) and Hamburg (down 40 per cent).

Demand for flights to Copenhagen has fallen, according to Kayak Credit: GETTY

Further afield, the cost of airfares to Osaka, Buenos Aires and the Maldives have risen, while to Vancouver (down 10 per cent) they have fallen.