Similar to Hyrule Warriors, Fire Emblem Warriors take Fire Emblem characters in a Dynasty Warriors hack-and-slash action style gameplay with some tweaks such as a weapon triangle and support leveling. For those unfamiliar, the core gameplay of Dynasty Warriors is where there are horde of enemies in the open world who to not attack you (exception of bosses) unless they think they're 90% sure they're going to get a direct hit since you're an overpowered character and they're most likely frozen in fear most of the time and let you hit them for free; making you feel like an overpowered baddass. Majority of the objectives to complete the level/stage include capturing all territories/bases and/or defeating the final boss of that level



--Characters (as of this review)

2 Playable original characters + 4 non-playable characters

21 Playable characters across Fire Emblem Series* + 7 non-playable/cameos

8 Playable DLC characters



*Playable characters across the Fire Emblem Series is not distributed evenly as most of them are from Fire Emblem Awakening (6 + 3 DLC) and Fire Emblem Fates (9 + 3 DLC). Characters are unlocked as you play through the story and history mode, or get as DLC.



Most characters with the same weapon type plays the same, with exception of their special moves and stats attributes (faster, but high attack or slower but tank-ier).



Out of the 23 characters, around 15 are unique play-styles meaning there are some clones like Two original starters, Chrome and Lucina, All 3 Archers, Marth and Celica for example.



There are 3 move types: on foot, cavalry and flyers.

On foot characters have easier time dodging.

cavalry better at crowd control

Flyers are same as cavalry, but faster and lower defense resulting in a hit-and-run tactic. Major downside is that archers take them out like they're one of the normal type enemies, so if you see one, fly for the hills and never come back (until one of your teammates take them out)



--Story

Pretty generic. King Ozosid tries to revive the evil dragon Velezark, and you have to travel to different dimensions to power up the Fire Emblem in order to stop them.



There aren't really any sub villains in the game. Most of the time, you are just trying to recruit characters to your team through forcing respect of your opponent so they join you (test if you're strong enough to lead them), or resolve a misunderstanding of invading their homeland



--Gameplay

As mentioned before, core gameplay is Dynasty Warriors -esk



You get your typical; light, strong attacks to chain combos, dodge and a powerful special move.



There's an awakening mode, similar to kaio-ken (dbz reference) where you get temporary stat boost which ends in a powerful AOE attack, also it ignores the weapon triangle once you're in this mode.



There's a focus the weapon triangle**. For the fodder enemies it doesn't really matter, but for generals, mid-bosses and bosses it either does double damage if it's super effective or half damage if it's not. This also works in reverse as the enemy can do more or less damage. Luckily there's a character switch function in game.



**Swords super effective against axes but less effective against lances,

Lances are more effective against swords but less effective against axes

Axes are effective against lances but less effective against swords

Arrows are ULTRA effective against flying units



There's a class change system, but instead of resetting back to level 1 they keep the same level, get a different appearance and have a significant stat boost. There is a pera-dealth (permanent death) option for the hardcore players if you want



Pre-match you can select from 8 characters you bring into battle. You only able to play 4 of the 8 you selected, while the other 4 are support. For the 4 playable you can switch between them at anytime, which is great for dealing with bosses as you have to take in consideration the weapon triangle (unless you're ridiculously over-leveled). For the support, you can pull up the pause menu and issue orders such as defend/attack a base or heal allies if they have a staff. Most of the time they are competent on the orders you issue to them, assuming they're at similar level or higher than your opponents. Exception being sending a flyer unit to fight against a bow enemy which is a death sentence.



You can also pair up allies and create bonds, giving them higher stats when near one another increasing their support level (C --> B --> A--> A+). Also you can combine specials to do higher damage and/or do a larger AOE attack. Similar to fire emblem games, there are support conversations once you rank up. A+ support is pairing specific as you cannot max out support for all characters. For example Cordillia can only get A+ support conversation with Lissa. Also no S rank, so no offsprings.



You collect materials and cash as you play through the game which can be used on an upgrade tree and purchasing weapons. Items are auto collected instead of having to walk over them



History Mode. You play the same maps as the main story missions, but with new objectives and better rewards/character unlocks. There are reenactments of events of the respective game you select through speech dialogue among characters



-Presentation

Character models are really good, and have an anime-esk style to them. All characters look and feel like the game they came from



Environmental backgrounds like most Dynasty Warriors type games are meh



You can play the game in 1080p 30fps, or 720p 60fps on TV mode. Handheld mode is restricted to 30fps.



There is split screen couch co-op, but the frame rate is horrible and there's less enemies on screen for some reason. You don't need to purchase another controller as you can play with a single joy con for each player



Game is fully voiced. No need to read text during story dialogue segments if you don't want to.



Overall, Fire Emblem Warriors is a very enjoyable game mixing in Fire Emblem elements (support levels/weapon triangle) with Dynasty Warriors type gameplay. If you're a Fire Emblem fan it's an excellent game to pick up as they combine variety of fire emblem heroes in different games (mostly Fates and Awakening) into one.