UPDATE: The Douglas County Sheriff's office has confirmed that one police officer has been killed after sustaining injuries from a shooting early this morning. Four other deputies were injured as well after police responded to a domestic dispute in a Denver suburb apartment complex.

Two civilians were injured during this incident. The suspect was shot and is believed to be dead as well. It is not known what sparked the domestic dispute nor are the specifics of the suspect or weapons used yet available to the public.

**Copper Canyon OIS Update**- Deputies responded to a domestic disturbance resulting in shots fired. 5 deputies shot by suspect. 1 deputy confirmed deceased. 2 civilians also shot by suspect. Suspect shot & believed to be dead & no longer a threat. #CopperCanyonOIS — DC Sheriff (@dcsheriff) December 31, 2017

ORIGINAL POST:

Multiple police officers were shot on Sunday morning in Denver, after police responded to a disturbance call at an apartment complex located in Douglas County. The exact number of injured police officers is unknown.

“We have multiple officers down,” said Deputy Jason Blanchard of the incident in Highlands Ranch. “We are not giving numbers or status at this point, we are still working on getting the suspect in custody.”

Denver 7, a local TV news station, reported hearing shots fired as the news crew arrived.

The incident occurred early this morning, around 6: 00 am. Police presence rapidly increased throughout the morning, as authorities brought in several squads to assist in the investigation.

“We have SWAT out there setting up and preparing to go in right now,” said a police spokesman.

The local Sheriff’s office issued a Code Red alert to surrounding residents and and told them to shelter in place, avoiding windows and exterior walls.

As of 10 minutes ago, the Douglas County Police Department tweeted citizens should still avoid the area.

UPDATE 0513 this morning deputies responded to he Copper Canyon Apartments for a Domestic Disturbance. During the Investigation, shots were fired and multiple deputies were injured. No status on the deputies and no status on civilian injuries. Please avoid this area. — DC Sheriff (@dcsheriff) December 31, 2017

This story will be updated as details come in.