Cookies

To make this site work properly, we sometimes place small data files called cookies on your device. Most big websites do this too.

What are cookies?

A cookie is a small text file that a website saves on your computer or mobile device when you visit the site. It enables the website to remember your actions and preferences (such as login, language, font size and other display preferences) over a period of time, so you don’t have to keep re-entering them whenever you come back to the site or browse from one page to another.

How do we use cookies?

Cookies used on our website are grouped into the following categories:

1.Essential - these are cookies that are required for the regular operation of our websites. For example, some cookies allow you to log-in to your account and add products to your basket and checkout securely, or carry out fraud detection and security checks (along with other similar things). These are essential for the website to work properly.

2.Functional-these cookies will enable you to move around the site and use its features such as accessing secure areas (e.g. content for registered users). These cookies also allow us to remember your user preferences, helping you to customize your experience on our site. The information gained through the use of functional cookies is anonymous and is not used for any other purpose.

3.Performance improvers- these cookies will help us understand how effective our content is, what interests our customers and to improve how our website works. This information is used for statistical purposes only and is not used to personally identify any user.

4.Advertising-these cookies enable us and our advertising partners to serve ads and manage our online advertising when you visit our site and sites upon which we advertise. These cookies record your visit to our website and the content you interact with, and may also be used to manage the number of times that you see an advertisement.

You can control and/or delete cookies as you wish – for details, see aboutcookies.org. You can delete all cookies that are already on your computer and you can set most browsers to prevent them from being placed. If you do this, however, you may have to manually adjust some preferences every time you visit a site and some services and functionalities may not work

How to control cookies

You can control and/or delete cookies as you wish – for details, see aboutcookies.org. You can delete all cookies that are already on your computer and you can set most browsers to prevent them from being placed. If you do this, however, you may have to manually adjust some preferences every time you visit a site and some services and functionalities may not work.