Fire Emblem Echoes: Shadows of Valentia is a wonderful remake of the original game, Fire Emblem Gaiden. Most of my criticisms, but also an appreciation for the game is how different it is from other Fire Emblem titles such as Fire Emblem Awakening or Fire Emblem Fates.



Good Elements of the game:



The Story

The story throughout the entire game is incredibly well told, and the combination of 3D cutscenes as well as animated cutscenes made the game come to life. I'm not going to spoil too much here so that you can enjoy the game yourself



The Dungeons:

I was worried about how well dungeons would work in the game, but they ended up being a treat to go through. Many of the puzzles were reminiscent of Ocarina of Time, which made the whole experience enjoyable.



Class Changes:

While I was sad to see the seal system go, the Mila idol system forced you to be more strategic about grinding, and where you progressed.



Two Armies:

I have friends that have played the game that hated having two armies, but I really enjoyed the idea of two armies. When the two armies were first revealed, I played with Celica's Army more than Alm's, which led to a slight disconnect in the stories, because one or two times there were parts of the story that would have made a little more sense had I progressed with Alm's and Celica's Army in a similar fashion, but I really loved the aspect of having two different armies, which allowed me to explore new strategies.



My Criticisms:

Weapons:

One of the more significant differences between this game and recent titles is the mechanics of weapons. In previous titles, units could hold multiple items, which allowed a new dimension of strategy, especially because many of the classes in the previous games could wield more than one weapon type. In this title, a majority of the classes can only wield 1 or 2 weapons, and many of the classes that can wield two weapons have magic as their primary or secondary weapon. While this may have been an issue previously because the unit would have to hold tomes to use magic, there is no issue in this case, because of magic is learned as a skill and doesn't need an inventory space, which justifies why units can only hold one item. To me, this reversal of strategy was jarring in the beginning, but I eventually started to get used to it.



Support Conversations:

One of the biggest letdowns for me was how the support conversations worked. The support conversations in Fire Emblem Awakening were better, because of what they yielded and when you could have them. In this title, you were forced to have support conversations in the middle of a fight, which often required pivoting your entire strategy to gain support levels. Unfortunately, Support conversations do not yield as much benefit as they did in previous titles. When your unit was attacking or being attacked, they normally had an ally that assists them and provides a boost in stats, and depending on the friendship levels, they could also attack back, or help shield you from damage. In Fire Emblem echoes, since you cannot pair up or have an ally help your attacking unit, the importance of support is vastly diminished.



The Weapons Triangle/Axes:

In this title, the Weapons Triangle does not exist, because of the limited availability of axes. In my opinion, this makes the game less strategic and some of my best units in previous games used axes. To my knowledge, the only axe you could have would be the woodcutter's axe and the base axe, and to my knowledge, no one can use the standard axe, because there aren't any classes that use the axe.



In summary, the game was wonderfully made, but those who have played the more recent games may feel that the game is too simple with the loss of many signature core mechanics.