A Grim Reaper, a detective and a woman who foresees death get ensnared in matters of life and death -- and dark mysteries of twenty years past.

1. Episode 1 85m Since she was little, Ha-ram has relied on her sunglasses to keep her sanity, because without them, she begins to see terrible things.

2. Episode 2 77m Both having important things to say to Mu-gang, Su-wan and Ha-ram visit his hospital room, but he doesn't seem to recognize either of them.

3. Episode 3 79m Notorious for his coldheartedness, Grim Reaper 444 is a big name in the otherworld. But his newly assigned partner threatens to ruin his reputation.

4. Episode 4 73m Devastated Ha-ram blames herself for Mu-gang's memory loss. 444 is desperate for Ha-ram's help, but Ha-ram isn't easily persuaded.

5. Episode 5 69m Determined to save the boy, Ha-ram heads back to the city of Mujin alone. Black is reminded of his consequences if Ha-ram succeeds in her endeavor.

6. Episode 6 78m Waking up from a nightmare about a videotape, Black realizes he's becoming more and more humanized and decides to hasten his search for his partner.

7. Episode 7 85m While at the hospital to do a favor for Man-soo, Ha-ram sees a vision of a stranger's death that contains a crucial piece of information.

8. Episode 8 88m As Black learns of the details behind Mujin’s shopping mall disaster, he finds it increasingly hard to set his emotions aside as a Grim Reaper should.

9. Episode 9 72m With Tiffany's assaulter still unidentified, Ha-ram strives to protect the lives of those involved in the incident -- much to Black's annoyance.

10. Episode 10 72m After hearing an explanation about Mu-gang's childhood photo, Black becomes troubled that Ha-ram doesn't know the truth.

11. Episode 11 69m At the site of the protest, Ha-ram foresees a fire accident involving a small child. Black crosses the line that a Grim Reaper should never cross.

12. Episode 12 76m Despite a stranger's warning about meddling, Ha-ram tries to track down a serial murderer -- even though an investigation is already underway.

13. Episode 13 77m As the detectives gather details about the psychopathic killer who's shaking up the country, Black continues his frantic search for Ha-ram.

14. Episode 14 75m Black hurries back to the site of Ha-ram's disappearance. Crazy Dog gets hold of what appears to be a safe key belonging to Man-soo's father.

15. Episode 15 85m Shocked by the news report about his father, Man-soo asks to see Man-ho and demands to know the truth. Ha-ram's mother confronts Black.

16. Episode 16 83m By retracing Mu-gang's steps on the day he was shot, Black gathers clues into the whereabouts of a videotape that contains definitive evidence.

17. Episode 17 86m Black chases after leads that will help him solve Joon's case, which is still a mystery. Meanwhile, Ha-ram spots a shadow inside someone's body.