Shin Megami Tensei IV Apocalypse is rated 4.7 out of 5 by 19 .

Rated 5 out of 5 by One Winged Angel from Love it as much as the original SMT IV Apocalypse is very much like the original, if you've played the original you will be at home. The battle system does make things a bit different, as Hama and Mudo now deal damage rather than being only hit-or-miss insta kill, and among other skills have bonus effects when Smirking. Magic attacks can now get critical hits, but this can be a problem for you in the first few hours in the game when you don't have demons that Null elements - you bring ones that only resist it, and the enemy essentially gets a free Press Turn for doing nothing extra. I highly recommend playing SMT IV first before playing IV Apocalypse. IV is regarded as more difficult, but Apocalypse isn't exactly a cake walk either. Same deal here, strike demons on the map to enter a battle, pick up relics in the world, and find the next boss. Maybe it's just me, but the world map in Apocalypse seems to be less of a pain to navigate as the one in IV. Many people in the fandom regard Apocalypse as more "Persona-like" and tend to dislike it for that, but the fact is that the similarity is only story-deep. The gameplay is still that of SMT IV. Your Partners get an assist gauge that lets them release an attack, which is comparable to Persona games's All-out attacks, but , that's about the limit of the similarities.

Rated 5 out of 5 by Alegrev47 from JRPG best jrpg better then persona why play the spin-off if you can play the main

Rated 5 out of 5 by Mahza from Best DS game ever! An amazing game with a very in depth story and massive world. I can't believe I've had a DS for so many years and never played these games!

Rated 5 out of 5 by Andyfire from Excellent game I didn't expect the pins. Though the gameplay is great. Atlas did good on this one. The characters and voice acting are top notch. Still playing it but I'm having a lot of fun

Rated 4 out of 5 by Charliekanijo from Great JRPG I love the shin megami tensei series and the spinoffs, this is just more of the same goodness that this series brings. A must play if you like atlus games or jrpgs

Rated 5 out of 5 by Hououin Kyouma from Wonderful Game An amazing direct sequel to SMT IV, and a must-play for ATLUS fans new or old. One of ATLUS's finest works.

Rated 5 out of 5 by Tacobell_The_Anime from One for the records Quite a while ago I had played Shin Megumi Tense IV for the 3DS. I was thoroughly impressed. Now after playing SMT IV: Apocalypse, I can say that the game defied all expectations and I consider it one of the best games for the 3DS. If you happen to own a 3DS, you must get this game.