Sometimes, there is a certain element that can take a song to another level, and according to Pusha T, Kanye West had a very specific idea about the secret ingredient needed to make "Runaway" a memorable track. The G.O.O.D. Music MC recently revealed to MTV News that 'Ye was adamant about packing as many "douche bags" into their collaboration as possible.

"I'm writing a verse, and I come back to the table, and it's something that I'm feeling, and he's like, 'Naw, but I need more douche bag.' And I'm like, 'All right, man, c'mon.' So I go back, and he's like, 'Naw, more douche bag!' He's screaming at me 'more douche bag' at this point," Push said during his "RapFix Live" interview Thursday (November 18) about crafting the douche-bag-toasting standout from 'Ye's My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy. "I just really had to, like, take myself out of it a little bit and then put ... the perspective of the guy ... who thinks he can fix it, but he's not being preventative."

Push said the song developed organically but that Yeezy had unexpectedly stumbled upon a subject the Clipse MC was very familiar with: the art of douche-baggery.

"It starts from a conversation. We're talking, and he's like, 'I like your perspective on that. Put a verse to that.' What he didn't know was [that] I was going through my own relationship turmoil at the time," Push revealed. "I was being a douche bag," he said, adding, vaguely, that he was doing "whatever wrong you can do" in a relationship.

Although the concept arose naturally enough, Push said 'Ye was relentless about making the final product just right.

"I've never worked with anybody like him," Push said. "He just pushes you and pushes you and pushes you. With 'Runaway,' I think I wrote that four times."

While Yeezy lab sessions had their moments of intensity, Push said developing a partnership with the G.O.O.D. Music impresario easily grew out of an excursion to West's tropical outpost.

"It started from a three-day trip to Hawaii," he said of becoming a part of the G.O.O.D. Music fold. "It was supposed to be a three-day trip, [and] it ended up being a month, just collaborating on his album. The 'Runaway' song was done, a couple of the G.O.O.D. Friday joints were done. 'So Appalled' was done. It was just a vibe thing. We got in there, and we just started vibing."

Push said Yeezy was also confident that joining forces with the Virginia spitter would be a partnership with the potential to shut down the game — or at least the 2010 MTV VMA stage, where the pair premiered the record.

"He was just [like], 'You know we about to kill this, right? It's about to be a real problem. This is gonna be, like, one of the biggest moments right now,' " Push remembered. "He was like, 'C'mon, the record's crazy, I'm debuting it here. When people see us together, we about to shock. We about to hurt some people.' "

What do you think a recording session with Kanye West would be like? Let us know in the comments!