Komodo Platform Newsletter View this email in your browser Happy New Year to all our loyal

followers and supporters Lets start 2018 with a BANG! Komodo is now live and trading on yet another exchange. HitBTC, a popular Bitcoin exchange, just opened the following markets: BTC-KMD

KMD-ETH

KMD-USDT Here's what they said on their blog: — HitBTC Blog We are excited to present a token of Komodo platform, providing a full blockchain kit for ICOs. Komodo guarantees to launch a transparent coin offering while maintaining investors’ privacy through the built-in confidentiality features. For the first time in crypto history it’s possible to issue and distribute native cryptocurrencies without a trusted third party. Public interest in KMD is rising, and the steady growth of our trading volume shows it. Here's a few milestones in our daily volume, pulled from coinmarketcap.com: June 2nd: +1M USD volume

August 12th: +6M USD volume

September 8th: +40M USD volume

December 21st: +80M USD volume The listing at HitBTC should support this continued advance. Read Announcement A KMD Market Flying Under The Radar Our fully functional, decentralized exchange, 'BarterDEX', is live and running. Earlier this year we quietly moved from testing it within our team to testing it semi-publicly on our Slack channels.



Here are few statistics that should prove BarterDEX's strong potential: +2.6M KMD volume since launch

+8000 KMD collected in trading fees

82 coins listed on our decentralized exchange

+16,000 completed atomic swaps For readers who would like to develop a unique blockchain project, it is worth noting how a project built on Komodo is automatically compatible with all of our ecosystem features--including both BarterDEX and our multi-coin wallet, Agama.



The current BarterDEX software application (GUI) we still recommend only to advanced users. Readers seeking to participate as early adopters should join our Slack channel and ask for assistance. Once the user experience is at the level of a normal centralized exchange, we plan to market BarterDEX heavily. Happy New Year to all our loyal followers and supporters, Lets start 2018 with a BANG! Komodo is now live and trading on HitBTC 💥 #HitBTC @hitbtc #komodo $kmd $komodo #HNY2018 pic.twitter.com/gqCHdDgmCV — $KMD (@KomodoPlatform) December 31, 2017