"We could think of no better time or place to kick off our partnership! We’ll be giving fans and visitors an incredible esports experience: meeting our professional players, watching streams taking place as they happen and a place at the booth’s League of Legends, CS:GO and Fifa gaming zones."

“We're very proud that FNATIC chose us for this partnership. The fact that some of the best esports players in the world will now be using OnePlus smartphones is already a win for us." "“Esports is a major focus for us now and we will support FNATIC at full force all the way to victory with a share common goal: high performance. Our booth at Paris Games Week is an important first step in our partnership and we are looking to teaming up at this amazing event.”

“After a successful trial together, we're excited to see our collaboration with OnePlus bring us together during Paris Games Week, one of Europe's largest gaming events. Our combined presence at Paris Games Week promises to be another showcase of an endemic brand like Fnatic and a global non-endemic brand like OnePlus going hand-in-hand to develop impactful campaigns for the vast esports audience.”

-

In an announcement on October 30th, the Fnatic organization revealed that they will be "joining forces" with OnePlus after a successful trial period. Fnatic also announced that they will be sharing a booth with the Chinese company at Paris Games Week, stating:The move into esports for OnePlus, who recently released their flagship OnePlus 5 smartphone, is not a particularly surprising one. The fairly new company has shot to prominence recently and seems to be aiming its marketing at the younger generation with the likes of the 10% discount offer for students purchasing the OnePlus 5. David Sanmartin, Head of Europe at OnePlus, made it clear that he is excited about both the Fnatic deal and esports in general:The CEO of Fnatic, Wouter Sleijffers, also commented on the deal and highlighted the importance of relationships between endemic and non-endemic brands in the growth of esports:The full press release can be found here