DOUGLAS COUNTY, Colo. — Five law enforcement officers were shot and one of them killed following a noise complaint at an apartment complex in a Denver suburb, according to the Douglas County Sheriff’s Office.

Two civilians also were shot and the suspect was shot and killed by police, Sheriff Tony Spurlock said.

The four injured officers are in stable condition, Spurlock told reporters. Deputy Zackari Parrish, 29, was killed.

Spurlock said the suspect, who was not identified, had barricaded himself in a bedroom and had been talking with officers before he suddenly opened fire with a rifle, hitting four deputies in the apartment.

“There were well over 100 rounds fired … from the suspect,” Spurlock said.

The suspect’s roommate, who was home, was not wounded. The two injured citizens apparently were not in the apartment.

Spurlock said the suspect has had previous contact with law enforcement “throughout the metro area,” but has no criminal history.

Tt was the second time deputies had gone to the apartment Sunday. There was another call at about 1:30 a.m., but when deputies arrived there was no noise.

Three patients with non-critical injuries were treated and released from Sky Ridge Medical Center in Lone Tree, Colorado, hospital spokeswoman Linda Watson said.

A motorcade accompanied the fallen officer from a hospital in nearby Littleton.

The incident happened shortly after 5 a.m. at the Copper Canyon Apartments in Highlands Ranch, about 20 miles south of Denver.

“Any citizens in the affected area are instructed to shelter in place, avoid windows and stay away from exterior walls,” the sheriff’s office tweeted. An emergency shelter has also been set up for those displaced by the massive police response.

Steven Silknitter, a resident of the Copper Canyon apartment complex, said he rushed home to check on his fiancee after hearing of the shooting and arrived to hear a “barrage of gunfire exchange.”

The area was blocked off, and Silknitter said he saw at least 20 police vehicles.

“I was deathly afraid that I was going to go home and she’d be gone … I didn’t know what I was going to find,” he told CNN affiliate KMGH.

“It’s the last thing I would have thought of at my complex,” he said. “It’s like something out of a movie.”

President Trump tweeted his “deepest condolences to the victims of the terrible shooting in Douglas County … and their families.”

The four injured officers are Mike Doyle, 28, Taylor Davis, 30, Jeffrey Pelle, 32, of the Douglas County Sheriff’s Department, and Tom O’Donnell, 31, a police officer with the Castle Rock Police Department.

Parrish is survived by his wife and two young children.

**Copper Canyon OIS Update**- Deputies responded to a domestic disturbance resulting in shots fired. 5 deputies shot by suspect. 1 deputy confirmed deceased. 2 civilians also shot by suspect. Suspect shot & believed to be dead & no longer a threat. #CopperCanyonOIS — DC Sheriff (@dcsheriff) December 31, 2017

Due to the size and cope of this investigation an emergency shelter has been set up @ East Ridge Rec Center, located at 9568 University Blvd. in Highlands Ranch. If anyone has been displaced from their homes due to this event please feel free to head there. — DC Sheriff (@dcsheriff) December 31, 2017

UPDATE 0513 this morning deputies responded to he Copper Canyon Apartments for a Domestic Disturbance. During the Investigation, shots were fired and multiple deputies were injured. No status on the deputies and no status on civilian injuries. Please avoid this area. — DC Sheriff (@dcsheriff) December 31, 2017

UPDATE, we have multiple deputies down, no update on their status. The scene remains active and please avoid the area. — DC Sheriff (@dcsheriff) December 31, 2017