Disclaimer

The purpose of the project is to launch a decentralized media-exchange platform and enable its participants to provide services and/or goods, and make payments within it by means of or be rewarded for actions within it with MAKE tokens (MAKE or Tokens).

The terms and conditions for Tokens purchase are described in the documents posted on the website https://maketoken.io (the "Website").

While purchasing Tokens you fully agree and accept all the risks inherent to the Token purchase and possession and described in the documents (as defined below) posted in the Website.

Here by Maketoken disclaims the following:

(a) while purchasing Tokens you acknowledge that you are not a permanent residence permit (green card) holder in the United States of America, or (ii) a citizen or a resident (tax or otherwise) of the United States of America, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands of United States, or any other possessions of the United States of America, or People's Republic of China, or South Korea, or a person of these states or (iii) a citizen or resident (tax or otherwise) of any country or territory where transactions with digital tokens and/or digital currencies are prohibited or in any other manner restricted by applicable law. "Person" is generally defined as a natural person residing in the relevant state or any entity organized or incorporated under the laws of the relevant state ("Restricted Person") and the Website, including but not limited to information and documents located herein ("documents") are intended to be available only to non-Restricted Persons

(b) to the extent the Tokens sold during the Token sale described herein may be securities under U.S. Securities Act of 1933, these Tokens are offered only outside of the United States to non-U.S. persons, pursuant to the provisions of Regulation S of the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended. These Tokens will not be registered under the Securities Act, and may not be offered or sold in the United States absent registration or under an applicable exemption from the registration requirements and the purchasers should not assume they will be able to resell their Tokens. Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state regulator has passed upon the merits of or given its approval to the Tokens, the terms of the Token sale, or the accuracy or completeness of any associated documents. Buying Tokens involves risks, and you should be able to bear the loss of your entire purchase. All purchasers should make their own determination of whether or not to make any purchase, based on your own independent evaluation and analysis;

(c) nothing in the documents regarding the Token sale shall be deemed to constitute a prospectus of any sort or solicitation for investment, nor does it in any way pertain to an offering or a solicitation of an offer to buy any security in any jurisdiction.