Five security personnel were killed and three were injured after heavily armed terrorists stormed a CRPF training centre in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir in the early hours today. Security forces also gunned down 2 attackers in the gunfight that is still underway.

CRPF spokesperson Rajesh Yadav said the bodies of two terrorists have also been recovered.

"Four CRPF jawans have been martyred and three others are injured. The bodies of two terrorists have also been recovered," Yadav was quoted as saying by PTI.

He said intermittent firing is still going on and one terrorist is believed to be holed up in building block.

Also read Soldier martyred in unprovoked ceasefire violation by Pakistan in Naushera sector

One of the injured personnel was identified as Saifuddin, a resident of Nowgam here, officials said.

The terrorists attacked the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) training centre in Awantipora around 2 am. They were armed with under-barrel grenade launchers and automatic weapons, officials said.

They first lobbed grenades and then began indiscriminate firing and entered the centre.

With the daybreak, more troops were called in to neutralise the terrorists. The buildings in the nearby area were also evacuated.

"Fidayeen managed to enter Lethpora camp at 0210hrs. Jawans got injured during initial intrusion from J&K Police Commando training area side. There is quite a possibility of a similar type of attack on other camps also" CRPF said.

Director General of Police S P Vaid said security forces had inputs about an impending militant strike in the Kashmir Valley for the past three days.

Terming the attack as "unfortunate", Vaid said as long as Pakistan keeps sending militants, security forces and people of Kashmir will continue to go through this.

"There was an input from the last two-three days.They (militants) were trying. They probably could not get a place and time earlier. So, they struck last night," Vaid told reporters here.

The fidayeen attack comes days after Jaish-e-Mohammad vowed to avenge the killing of its chief Noor Mohammad Tantray by security forces at Samboora village of Pulwama district.

Noor Tantray alias Noor Trail, a midget militant who had jumped bail, was the main architect of recent fidayeen attacks in Kashmir.

(With PTI inputs)