As more women continue to come forward accusing Harvey Weinstein and other powerful figures in Hollywood of sexual harassment, sexual assault and rape, another decades-old issue facing Hollywood has come to light.

In a thorough article for The Daily Beast, writer Ira Madison III outlines some of the accusations that have been floating around the industry, like the increase in criticism over director Victor Salva, who pleaded guilty to five felony accounts after sexually abusing a 12-year-old on the set of 1988's "Clownhouse."

SEE ALSO: Bob Weinstein accused of sexual harassment by TV showrunner

Salva has continued to nab work in Hollywood, including directing the "Jeepers Creepers" trilogy.

In the wake of the allegations against Weinstein, other male stars have been coming forward about their own experiences in Hollywood, too.

James Van Der Beek said last week that older powerful men harassed him and cornered him "in inappropriate sexual conversations when [he] was much younger."

Elijah Wood spoke out about the childhood sexual abuse in an interview last year, saying that he knew of fellow child actors who had been "preyed upon" by "vipers."

"Clearly something major was going on in Hollywood," he said. "It was all organized. [...] There is darkness in the underbelly. What bums me about these situations is that the victims can't speak as loudly as the people in power. That's the tragedy of attempting to reveal what is happening to innocent people: They can be squashed, but their lives have been irreparably damaged."

Wood later clarified that he had not experienced or observed any such abuse firsthand.

SEE ALSO: Reese Witherspoon emotionally recalls being sexually assaulted at 16, says this wasn't an 'isolated incident'

And in 2011, Corey Feldman told "Nightline" that pedophilia is "the big secret" in Hollywood.

"I can tell you that the No. 1 problem in Hollywood was and is and always will be pedophilia," he said at the time. "That's the biggest problem for children in this industry."

Feldman also alleged that trauma from childhood sexual abuse led to his friend Corey Haim's death.

The star tweeted that it wasn't Weinstein who had molested him or Haim, later adding that he wished his best friend was here to witness “the turning of the tide” on this issue.

HOWEVER 4 THE RECORD I WOULD LIKE 2 SAY NO HARVEY WEINSTEIN WAS NOT THE MAN WHO MOLESTED ME OR MY FORMER ACTING PARTNER. OBVIOUSLY PEDOS — Corey Feldman (@Corey_Feldman) October 13, 2017

More from AOL.com:

Jennifer Lawrence opens up about 'humiliating' nude lineup in front of Hollywood producer

Laura Dern steps out with her gorgeous family: Meet son Ellery, 16, and 12-year-old Jaya

Harvey Weinstein resigns from Weinstein Co. board as company struggles to survive