~ Winter Events ~ ​





We had a great time but they are over, sadly. Thank you for everyone who helped out especially the enforcers and guides.







Also

Also @BWOT is hosting a Christmas Tree building competition in plotworld. Warp ChristmasTreeComp and grab a plot to enter in the competition by grabbing a plot. Winners will be announced next Times.





~ Rank Updates ~

​





reycraft : Big shout out to reycraft for making it into the purple legion! Already they’ve helped tons with their new string of slightly more important jobs! Can’t wait to see what great builds they plant here on MCME! Congrats!



superlolster : Well I think I can say this for everyone, (this is BWOT) that we have all been cheering you on and it puts a great smile on our faces that you have finally reached your goal. Countless of uncompleted theme builds, loads of DA jobs and some top-notch advice from many designers has finally got you this rank. Congratulations!



Isengard : (Formerly known as Isengard1234) has finally been able to gain hold of this very special name, which must have been the reason why he has decided to honor MCME with his skills again. A hearty ‘welcome back!’ to Isengard!



To those who recently applied for Foreman or Designer : I ( Here we are in edition three! Give a round of applause to our new artist promotees!: Big shout out to reycraft for making it into the purple legion! Already they’ve helped tons with their new string of slightly more important jobs! Can’t wait to see what great builds they plant here on MCME! Congrats!: Well I think I can say this for everyone, (this is BWOT) that we have all been cheering you on and it puts a great smile on our faces that you have finally reached your goal. Countless of uncompleted theme builds, loads of DA jobs and some top-notch advice from many designers has finally got you this rank. Congratulations!: (Formerly known as Isengard1234) has finally been able to gain hold of this very special name, which must have been the reason why he has decided to honor MCME with his skills again. A hearty ‘welcome back!’ to Isengard!To those who recently applied foror: I ( @Finrod_Amandil ) will reach out to you to schedule a day where we can sit together, maybe have a trial job, but surely a quick talk about the application and how to proceed. Thanks already for showing interest in ascending on the rank ladder!



~ Interviews ~ ​



This week’s randomly selected interviewed member is a person who actually wanted to be interviewed. He has an interests in all that technical stuff like banners and fireworks, which is pretty rare, so lets get started.





Question 1: How did you find MCME?



Hmmm... let me think. Contrary to what some people may believe it's actually pretty long since I first joined. It was back in 2014, merely seven days after the whitelist was abolished if I've understood things right. I might have heard about it even earlier than that but I'm not sure. The reason I decided to go against my own dislike of multiplayer Minecraft and join the server was seeing a video of a tour through old Moria which I followed up by watching a recommended hour long server tour video by the same YouTuber.

Question 2: What was your experience like as an Adventurer?



Yes I was indeed a droog, even had the rank when it was still called Droog. I was probably a quite droogy droog. As soon as I saw something that piqued my interest I asked about it. "What's this wool pillar for?" "Where does this road lead?" "When do you think you'll start building Mordor?" Ah. Good times.



I especially remember my first day on the server. I joined a massive, and I mean massive server-wide tour with about twelve people in the tour and two or three staff members following us outside of the tour (one of which I recall being





Question 3: What made you want to become an Artist?



Twice have I decided to go for Artist. The first time was a few months after I first joined. I thought it was the natural way of things to rank up so I started building a Minas Tirith plot house to use as my application however the day after I finished it I got so sick I couldn't even go on my pc to mark the house as finished and thus it was deleted when the build time was up. After that I only got on the server every few months or less as I didn't really have enough interest in it to keep me there. Yes I was indeed a droog, even had the rank when it was still called Droog. I was probably a quite droogy droog. As soon as I saw something that piqued my interest I asked about it. "What's this wool pillar for?" "Where does this road lead?" "When do you think you'll start building Mordor?" Ah. Good times.I especially remember my first day on the server. I joined a massive, and I mean massive server-wide tour with about twelve people in the tour and two or three staff members following us outside of the tour (one of which I recall being @Credoo ). The tour took just over two hours and went along the path of the fellowship from Bagend to and through old Moria and then all the way to the pink wool wireframe that would become Minas Tirith one day. At the end there was only eight people left in the tour and it was like 2 am for me but I was so excited I didn't care. Sadly I have forgotten the Guide who gave this awesome tour.Twice have I decided to go for Artist. The first time was a few months after I first joined. I thought it was the natural way of things to rank up so I started building a Minas Tirith plot house to use as my application however the day after I finished it I got so sick I couldn't even go on my pc to mark the house as finished and thus it was deleted when the build time was up. After that I only got on the server every few months or less as I didn't really have enough interest in it to keep me there.

The second time I went for Artist was now in early 2017. I had completely forgotten about MCME until YouTube recommended me to watch the five years anniversary video which reminded me of this epic server. This time I went for Artist because I saw it as the best way for me to help the server out and hopefully it would keep me from slipping away from it due to lack of interest and thus I wouldn't lose all the new friends I had made here. I haven't regretted that decision even once since then.





Question 4: What is your favorite thing about being an Artist?



Being able to build this epic world. Sure there's several other perks with being an Artist but the freedom to build is definitely, unquestionably the best thing about being an Artist.





Question 5: Where is your favorite place on MCME?



Atop the natural bridge in the first big chamber of the Glittering Caves because damn that's a beautiful place, so serene and calming with an absolutely stunning visual effect of the reflections in the water and the glittering crystals in the ceiling above.





Question 6: Who is your favorite character in LOTR or the Hobbit?



Saving the hardest question for last eh? I don't know, I don't really pick favorites when reading. In the movies it's most definitely Samwise Gamgee due to Sean Astin's stellar performance in portraying Sam's love and dedication towards his master Frodo but in the books I don't know. I mean I really like Tom Bombadil but that choice feels almost cliché. I also like Merry and Pippin but that's more due to my relief of them not being the comic relief they are in the movies (yes I watched the movies before reading the books okay?). I don't know. I can't really pick a favorite character from the books as I mostly compare them to their movie portrayals which I know is unjust of me towards the original characters.





Special thanks to Ryttyr for taking time out of his regular schedule for this! We appreciate what you do!





~ Winners of “The Week” ~

​

Some interesting winners this week! Check them out and give many congrats! They earned it!



MEDIA OF THE WEEK: ​



This week we have an assortment of iconic screenshots to MCME compiled into one movie poster style image. Put together by our winner, @RubenPieterMark!

This week we have an assortment of iconic screenshots to MCME compiled into one movie poster style image. Put together by our winner,





The movie poster renditions of the major builds are a fantastic idea. They’re what people come to this server for and to capture it in such a glorifying image is perfect! A round of applause to Ruben for such a nice idea!



THEME-BUILD OF THE WEEK: ​



This week, we have something a little different! After such a large turn-up in the past couple of theme builds, we’ve decided to select a third, second, and first place for this category! Thank you everyone for showing up and doing a themed build!!!





Here we have the first themebuild and picture done by @StinkyBunny42! Congrats on first place. Second we have @Fraspace5. In third we have @Shredz7. Congratulations all on putting so much effort in!



Honourable mention: QuantaCube



Here we have the first themebuild and picture done by! Congrats on first place. Second we have. In third we have. Congratulations all on putting so much effort in!Honourable mention:

~ Upcoming ~ ​



Staff Meeting

This week we will have a staff meeting on Wednesday January 3rd. Please (to all staff) be there at 19:00 BST. The itinerary is still being made but this meeting will have a lot of very important topics discussed. All the details of it will of course be presented to you in the next edition of the MCME Times!



Additionally I (Finrod) really would like to give the meeting schedule I devised some months ago again; to have a public meeting every second month (and every other month a staff meeting). So, reckon with another public meeting around late January or early February, where you can bring in and discuss all your ideas to improve the server!



Themed Build

Theme: Durin’s Tower

Resource Pack: Moria

Duration: 1 week





MCME Audiobook

The Audiobook, hosted by



This week we will have a staff meeting on Wednesday January 3rd. Please (to all staff) be there at 19:00 BST. The itinerary is still being made but this meeting will have a lot of very important topics discussed. All the details of it will of course be presented to you in the next edition of the MCME Times!Additionally I (Finrod) really would like to give the meeting schedule I devised some months ago again; to have a public meeting every second month (and every other month a staff meeting). So, reckon with another public meeting around late January or early February, where you can bring in and discuss all your ideas to improve the server!Durin’s TowerMoria1 weekThe Audiobook, hosted by @TI_020601 is taking place regularly on Saturday evenings, 8:20pm GMT, unless announced otherwise in this thread: The New Audio Book

~ Lore of the Week ~

​

Radagast the Brown



Character in the Lord of the Rings

Radagast the Brown, also known as Aiwendil, was one of the Wizards sent to Middle-earth to contest the will of Sauron. Originally a Maia of Yavanna, he had a strong affinity for animals. He dwelt, for a time, at Rhosgobel on the western eaves of Mirkwood, near the Gladden Fields on the Great River.





Durin’s Folk



Group of Dwarves

Durin's Folk were the Longbeards (Sigin-tarâg in Khuzdul), one of the seven kindreds of Dwarves whose leaders were from the House of Durin. Their first king was named Durin, who was one of the seven Fathers of the Dwarves.



In the deeps of time, the Fathers of the Dwarves awoke. Durin, who had slept alone at Mount Gundabad,wandered south along the Misty Mountains until he came upon Azanulbizar. In the caves above Kheled-zâram, he founded the city of Khazad-dûm, the home of Durin's Folk. Durin lived there so long he became known as Durin the Deathless, yet in the end he died before the end of the First Age.



The Dwarves of Khazad-dûm also colonized the Iron Hills, which became Durin's Folk's primary source of iron-ore. The Dwarf-road of Mirkwood ran north-east to the Hills for the dwarf-traders and merchants between Khazad-dûm and the Hills. Durin's Folk also considered the Grey Mountains, which lay between these two mansions, to be within their territory.





~ More Media ~ ​



Just some extra screenshots which are pretty amazing. Also if you haven’t read it already read this excellent story by Quanta:



Then, also like and support this awesome post by Quaron: Just some extra screenshots which are pretty amazing. Also if you haven’t read it already read this excellent story by Quanta: MCME Miracle Then, also like and support this awesome post by Quaron: Minecraft Middle Earth - Recreating Tolkien's World Since 2010













​





​







Hello everyone! This year was a great year for MCME and I wanted to remember all the fun times we had this year. This video will include rank promotions, events, and more! I hope you enjoy it as I put a lot of effort into it.



-Mapthor





~ Advertisements ~

​

Artist

Want to leave your mark on MCME in a blocky way? Apply for artist on the forums today!



If you have any questions about becoming and being an Artist, then please ask any designer, we are 50% of the time willing to listen to you , and any current Artist.



Guide

Howdy folks! Arken here looking for elite members of the community! Commoner Court isn’t the peak of MCME you know! Submit an application for Guide today and see about scheduling your very own trial tour!



What’s it going to take? Simply a friendly attitude paired with a propensity for helping with and discussing our Minecraft Middle Earth!



Just click



Want to leave your mark on MCME in a blocky way? Apply for artist on the forums today!If you have any questions about becoming and being an Artist, then please ask any designer, we are 50% of the time willing to listen to you, and any current Artist.Howdy folks! Arken here looking for elite members of the community! Commoner Court isn’t the peak of MCME you know! Submit an application for Guide today and see about scheduling your very own trial tour!What’s it going to take? Simply a friendly attitude paired with a propensity for helping with and discussing our Minecraft Middle Earth!Just click Guide and apply today!

~ Closing Statement ~ ​



As we move into the New Year, I would of course like to reflect on what we’ve achieved. More importantly, I’d like to look forward to what is to come.



A closing thought for this edition: We’ve come a long way here on MCME. Just over seven years in the making. We’re getting to the end of another chapter here on the server as we’re finishing up Gondor. Everyone plays a role in our machine here. What have you done so far? And what can you do more of to keep MCME prospering?



The upcoming staff meeting on January the 3rd will hopefully kick off some changes that can bring great changes to the server. The focus will especially lie on how to share the To-Do’s better across more people so that tasks like application reviews, project progress and development of the RP and other things can move ahead more swiftly and more steadily.



Now time for that Tolkien quote to wrap it up

next time!





“It’s the job that’s never started that



takes longest to finish” ​

The Official MCME Times



mcmiddleearth.com ​

till