ARLINGTON, Texas – Speaking after Friday night’s Cotton Bowl win over USC, Ohio State running back Mike Weber said he needed to take some time before he decides on his future plans.

Weber, a third-year sophomore from Detroit, was relegated to a backup role this season after suffering a serious hamstring injury during preseason workouts. He rushed for 1,096 yards and nine touchdowns last season.

But the injury allowed true freshman J.K. Dobbins to slide into the starting role. Dobbins ended up joining Weber, Robert Smith and Maurice Clarett as the only freshmen in OSU history to reach the 1,000-yard rushing mark.

The 5-10, 214-pound Weber capped his sophomore season with five carries for 18 yards as well as one catch for 16 yards. That catch helped set up a touchdown run by J.T. Barrett that gave OSU a 24-0 lead midway through the first half.

For the year, Weber ended up with 101 carries for 626 yards and 10 touchdowns. He reflected on the ups and downs from this season.

“It was hard for me because I had never been in this situation,” Weber said. “I didn’t know how to handle it. But I got around the right people with my family. They caressed me. I got back toward the end of the season and I made a few plays when I got the ball.

“I’m happy that I was taught a life lesson this year. What happened was not expected, but I think I did a good job with it. The people who love me the most helped me get through it. I had a big bump in the road. I learned how to handle tough situations and get through it.”

Weber said he understood his role as the season wore on. He excelled with 162 yards against Michigan State and 108 against Illinois the following week.

“It’s hard to manage two good backs,” Weber said. “This whole bowl season, they spread me out and tried to find ways to get me the ball.”

There has been some sentiment that Weber might test the NFL waters to avoid being stuck in a platoon with Dobbins again next year.

The players are now off until the winter semester begins on Jan. 8. Weber said he would use this time to get advice on his NFL draft stock.

“I’m really not sure right now,” he said. “I’m going to get with my family and I want to see what’s out there for me. I will get with the coaches and see what is the plan and go from there.

“This year didn’t play out the way I wanted it to. I hit a bump in the road. It’s kind of hard sometimes to manage that and control that. I got healthy by the end of the season and just did what I could at that point.”

Also Check Out

Game Recap: Buckeyes roll in Cotton Bowl

Campbell has a decision to make

Watch: Video of OSU celebrating bowl win

Watch: Takeaways from Cotton Bowl win

Jones asked about NFL decision

What We Learned: OSU 24, USC 7

Meyer Verbatim: ‘Our D-line dominated the game’

Baker facing decision on entering NFL draft

Hubbard declares for NFL draft

Undisputed Champions Book: Special Holiday Price

We have lowered the price of Undisputed Champions to $10 (plus $2.95 for shipping) for holiday sales via mail only.

Click here for ordering info and comments on Undisputed Champions, our recap magazine of Ohio State’s 2014 national championship run. (Online sales still $15 plus shipping.)