This map shows the 4 planned segments of the pipeline project.

Courtesy Paiute Pipeline Company

More onlineVisit Visit www.paiutepipeline.com to learn more about Paiute Pipeline Company.

CARSON CITY, Nev. — Paiute Pipeline, the company that feeds western Nevada’s natural gas needs, is getting ready for an $18 million project to expand its capacity in western Nevada.

Mark Litwin, vice president and general manager of Paiute Pipeline, said the existing system will be expanded and upgraded to provide service to the growing needs all the way from South Lake Tahoe through Douglas, Carson and Lyon counties.

Paiute Pipeline builds, maintains and operates the pipe system that brings natural gas all the way from the Idaho/Nevada border to Reno and the rest of western Nevada. In total, the company operates 895 miles of pipe from Idaho, through Elko, Winnemucca, Lovelock and Wadsworth before it splits to provide gas to Reno and Carson City; North and South Lake Tahoe; and Minden and Gardnerville.

Its biggest customers are Southwest Gas, which owns Paiute, and Sierra Pacific Power Co. But Litwin said they also serve a variety of “end users,” including major mines like Newmont and the casinos in the Lake Tahoe Basin.

“We cover a lot of ground in Northern Nevada,” he said.

The project set to start in the summer of 2018 will either install new pipe or up-size existing lines throughout the area. He expects the work will start in June and be complete by November.

Litwin said the project will not, for the most part, inconvenience residents or businesses.

“There are no planned interruptions of service,” he said.

Litwin said their contractors will work with local officials all the way from Tahoe through Douglas, Carson and Lyon counties to ensure there are no problems.

“All of our stuff is underground,” he said. “They won’t see anything generally as a result of this project.”

He said since most of the work will be in Paiute’s existing rights of way, there are only two places where there may be traffic issues. One will be on Kingsbury Grade between South Lake Tahoe and Gardnerville, where workers will have to cut the highway to install new pipe.

That work will force some lane restrictions but will mostly be done at night. The new 12-inch diameter pipe will increase capacity in the South Lake Tahoe area.

In addition, they have to run pipe under Highway 50 near where the V&T Railroad terminates at the Carson/Lyon County line east of the capital. Again, Litwin said, there will be lane restrictions but mostly at night.

“Otherwise, everything, I think, is far enough off the road that there are not going to be any travel restrictions,” he said.

He said Southwest Gas and Sierra Pacific are the primary drivers of the expansion project because of what they expect to see in economic growth in western Nevada. He said when they see an increase in people and business coming to Nevada, “then Southwest Gas has to respond by acquiring additional capacity.”

And that task falls to Paiute Pipeline.

Business leaders are predicting continued economic growth not only in the Minden/Gardnerville area but the capital and, with the newly opened USA Parkway, in the Dayton corridor. And that means continued residential growth as the population expands.

The first segment will be on the west side of the Carson River Valley between Foothill Road and Kingsbury Grade.

Segment two is in Carson City along Fairview Drive and South Edmonds just south of East 5th Street. That part of the project will replace just more than 1.5 miles of 8-inch pipe with 12-inch pipe — a total of 8,300 feet of pipe.

The third segment will be in the Dayton corridor between Empire and Mound House. It consists of 2.34 miles along the existing lateral – some 12,400 feet of new pipe laid alongside the existing pipe.

The final segment is on the northern edge of the Virginia Range west of Highway 50 some 2.5 miles southwest of Fernley. The largest part of the project, it will install 4.17 miles of new 20-inch diameter pipe parallel to the existing 16-inch pipe.

Geoff Dornan is a reporter with the Nevada Appeal, a newspaper within the Sierra Nevada Media Group, which publishes First Nation’s Focus.