A Florida father gave his son a Christmas gift that will keep his deceased mother's voice alive a little longer by including a very special voice box inside the boy's stuffed monkey.

Antonio Vargas Sr. of Orlando, captured the touching moments from creating the present to gifting it to his son, Antonio Jr., who bursts into tears while holding the toy tight, on video.

Antonio Jr. prematurely lost his mother in July of this year. The father had several recordings of her voice speaking to her 'little monkey.' He brought the recordings to Build-A-Bear and began to make holiday magic happen for his beloved son.

Antonio Vargas Jr. opens the special present from his father, a stuffed animal with his mother's voice saying sweet messages to her son. His mother passed away on July 4

Antonio Sr. also captured going to Build-A-Bear to create the heart warming gift for his son

Mama's lil monkey: The Vargas family bonded together after Antonio Jr.'s mother passed away

He posted the videos of the process, as well as the result, to his Facebook page. The emotions in creating the gift for his son at the workshop is palpable.

'This is a real big touching moment as a parent prepping this monkey to have a heartbeat and to speak to my son, so that my son can hear his mother's voice again. She passed away on 4th of July. We always called our son our little monkey. So on Christmas Day, his dream came true!!! I love my little man with all my heart, Daddy loves you.'

Every time Vargas' son presses the stuffed monkey's hands, feet, and belly, a voice recording of his late mother will say: 'I love you to the world and back,' and 'Give me a big hug, I love you,' or 'I love you guys so much and I will always love you,' and 'Tell him Mommy loves him.'

Holidays are extremely hard for anyone dealing with loss, and it is an unimaginable grief for young ones to endure.

While it is unclear how his mother passed, his father knew just how to keep her memory close for their first holiday without her.

It seemed impossible not to be touched by the video, with people reaching out with warm well wishes for the family, and commending the father on his thoughtful gift.

The family also took a trip to her grave days before Christmas in another moving moment- keeping her close to their hearts for the holiday season by placing a small Christmas tree on her site

'Such a beautiful timeless gift. I wish I could even hear my Mothers voice just one more time. Antonio with have this forever..it will be an heirloom gift to cherish forever,' one person commented on the video.

While another pointed out that his mother has been made a bit 'immortal' in a sense.

A lot of people who were beyond touched had also lost their own mother, and wished hope for the family: 'Just beautiful...I cried. I also lost my mom this year. My condolences on your loss. Antonio, Jr., I hope you will honor your mother's memory with your life. She obviously loves you so much. Make her proud!'

Vargas Sr. also brought his son to visit her grave on December 20, and placed a small Christmas tree atop her grave site.