Players from the Michigan State football team are openly rooting against Michigan, even when the Big Ten has an opportunity to finish the bowl season with an unblemished record.

MSU linebackers Joe Bachie and Chris Frey, Jr., took to Twitter on Saturday to voice their support for the Big Ten, while also getting in one last dig at Michigan.

The league is 7-0 in bowl games this year, with Michigan the last team left to play, Monday against South Carolina in the Outback Bowl (noon, ESPN2).

"Good luck to the rest of the B1G and South Carolina," Chris Frey, Jr. wrote Saturday afternoon, before Penn State beat Washington, 35-28, in the Fiesta Bowl.

Good luck to the rest of the B1G and South Carolina! — Chris Frey Jr (@Cfrey_23) December 30, 2017

Then, later in the night, Wisconsin knocked off Miami, 34-24, in the Orange Bowl.

"Big ten baby!," Bachie wrote. "But still #CmonSouth Carolina"

Big ten baby! But still #CmonSouthCarolina — Joe Bachie (@JoeBach35) December 31, 2017

Through Sunday, the Big Ten remained the lone conference with an unbeaten bowl record. The Big 12 (5-2) and Sun Belt (4-1) are the only other leagues with records above .500.

Meanwhile, the PAC 12 dropped to 1-8. The SEC is 1-3, with five teams still left to play, including two (No. 3 Georgia, No. 4 Alabama) in the College Football Playoff.

The dings, while not surprising, come after a contentious bowl selection season between Michigan and Michigan State. The Spartans, who beat Michigan and finished the 2017 regular season with a 9-3 record, were passed over for the 8-4 Wolverines by the Outback Bowl selection committee.

That set off a back and forth between MSU coach Mark Dantonio and Jim Harbaugh, with Harbaugh telling a Florida TV station that he'd "just prefer that (Dantonio) didn't talk about us."

Dantonio responded shortly thereafter, writing on Twitter: "For all Spartans, 'it's not all over, it'll never be over, it's just getting started' #SpartansWill"

Michigan State beat Washington State, 42-17, on Thursday in the Holiday Bowl.