O4W Pizza's Grandma Pie / Photo courtesy of Blue Hominy

Zunzi's specializes in sandwiches such as The Godfather. / Photo contributed by Zunzi's

Other spots we're keeping an eye on:

The Battery at SunTrust Park eateries: New concepts will open next year in the entertainment area next to SunTrust Park including a second location of Ponce City Market spot El Super Pan ; the first Atlanta location of Punch Bowl Social ; and ice cream and candy spots Farrell's and Sweet Pete's.

Bazati Hall and Estrella -- The Common Ground development off the Eastside Beltline trail will be home to Bazati Hall, a European and Latin-inspired brasserie with eight artesian shops, and Estrella, a rooftop champagne and cocktail bar withh a menu of small plates.

Eastside Beltline between Ralph McGill Boulevard and North Avenue at 550 Somerset Terrace NE. Expected to open in early 2018.

Coalition Food & Beverage: A holdover from last year's most anticipated restaurants list , Coalition is set to deliver “progressive and signature interpretations of American wood-fired classics” including steaks, sandwiches and salads, as well as a full bar, from the team behind the popular Osteria Mattone and Table & Main.

50 Canton St., Alpharetta. Expected to open in early 2018.

Hattie B's Hot Chicken -- The popular Nashville eatery will open its first Atlanta location, offering hicken sandwiches, tenders and wings at six different spice levels ranging from Southern (no heat) to Shut the Cluck Up (burn notice), as well as a variety of sides and desserts.

299 Moreland Ave. NE, Atlanta. Expected to open in early 2018.

LLoyd's: This concept from Victory Brands, the company behind Victory Sandwich Bar , Little Trouble and S.O.S. Tiki Bar will be an “unholy mix of Chili’s and southern comfort food" according to co-owner Ian Jones. The spot will also feature a coffee house next door.

900 DeKalb Ave., Atlanta. No announced opening date.

Manny's Grant Park Pub: Longtime Atlanta barman Manuel Maloof, who is the grandson of the founder of Manuel’s Tavern, is set to open this bar in Grant Park.

588 Woodward Ave., Atlanta. Expected to open in late spring 2018.

Marietta Square Market concepts: The new food hall will introduce pizza spot Forno; Mexican street food concept Street Taco; Grand Champion BBQ; TopPoke Korean and Poke; Pita Mediterranean Street Food; and Tiny Bubble Tea Bar.

68 N. Marietta Pkwy NW, Marietta. Expected to open in summer 2018.

Mary Hoopa's House of Fried Chicken and Oysters: Another holdover from last year's list, this concept from One Eared Stag owner and chef Robert Phalen will specialize in fried chicken as well as oysters every which way in East Lake's Hosea + 2nd development.

2371 Hosea L. Williams Drive, Atlanta. UPDATE: Opened in February 2018

Momonoki: This restaurant from the team behind Brush Sushi Izakaya in Midtown will put an emphasis on Japanese comfort cuisine in the Modera Midtown development.

95 8th St. NW, Atlanta. Expected to open in the first quarter of 2018.

Ramen Station: The ramen spot from the team behind Taiyo Ramen, Suzy Siu's, Double Dragon and the newly-opened Noona is set to debut soon in the Larkin development in Grant Park.

519 Memorial Drive SE, Atlanta. Expected to open in spring 2018.

Zunzi's: The first Atlanta outpost of this Savannah sandwich favorite is set to open in Collier Hills.

1971 Howell Mill Road, Atlanta. No announced opening date.

Support real journalism. Support local journalism. Subscribe to The Atlanta Journal-Constitution today. See offers.

Your subscription to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution funds in-depth reporting and investigations that keep you informed. Thank you for supporting real journalism.