The New Year has arrived in several parts of the world, and the cards and messages from the games industry are pouring in. Get the full roundup below. We will add more as we come across them, so be sure to check back.

4A Games

Happy New Year!

С Новым годом! Счастливого Рождества! pic.twitter.com/aIHFVpF62D — 4A Games (@4AGames) January 1, 2018

5pb. Games

5pb. Games USA

Happy New Years! We wonder what kind of Future Gadgets Okabe and crew will come up with in 2018? #SteinsGate pic.twitter.com/0or3tYSaWS — 5pb. Games USA (@5pbgamesUSA) January 1, 2018

A Certain Magical Virtual-On

Ace Combat

Acquire

Akiman

Animal Crossing

Aquaplus

Arc System Works

Arika

Arms

ArtePiazza

This year, we have a greeting from Opoona. And together with his creator Shintarou Majima, I am also preparing in order to reunite with our friends that live on planet Landroll. It will be an extremely enjoyable New Year for everyone! Good luck!

Atlus Japan

Bandai Namco Entertainment America

Happy New Year to all our fans! We have so many amazing games coming out in 2018 and we can’t wait for you to play them all! Make sure you stay tuned as we bring you the latest updates on your favorite games! pic.twitter.com/PmwgHurySr — Bandai Namco US (@BandaiNamcoUS) January 1, 2018

Bandai Namco Entertainment Europe

Bomberman

Borderlands

Have a #HappyNewYear, Vault Hunters! *UNCE UNCE UNCE WUB WUB WUB WUB* pic.twitter.com/yvGkCr8N4k — Borderlands (@Borderlands) December 31, 2017

Bravely Default: Fairy’s Effect

The Caligula Effect: Overdose

Capcom’s Hideaki Itsuno

A message:

“Happy New Year! I’m sorry that I was unable to announce my new project last year. We have currently reached the climax of development. I’m making an amazing game, so please wait just a little longer.”

Crash Bandicoot

Let the Wumpa fly and have a Happy New Year! 🙌 pic.twitter.com/H5eCjzANAy — Crash Bandicoot (@CrashBandicoot) January 1, 2018

Curve Digital

What an amazing 2017 we had and it was all thanks to you our fans and you've all got so much to look forward to as well in 2018, here's just a small taste of what's to come. pic.twitter.com/POU5CUxA1v — Curve Digital (@CurveDigital) January 1, 2018

D3 Publisher

Dead or Alive Xtreme 3: Venus Vacation

DJMAX

Dragon Quest X

Drift Spirits

Dungeon Defenders

Defenders of Etheria, from all of us at Trendy, we wish you a Happy New Year! pic.twitter.com/Zt5J1oQEGw — Dungeon Defenders (@TrendyEnt) January 1, 2018

Dx2 Shin Megami Tensei: Liberation

Falcom

(Source)

Fallout

Grab an ice cold Nuka-Cola Quantum to ring in the New Year! Cheers! and #HappyNewYear! pic.twitter.com/uzL8KnzaG6 — Fallout (@Fallout) December 31, 2017

Final Fantasy XV

From Software

(Source)

Game Arts

We wish you all a Happy New Year. pic.twitter.com/pTS8nsoxq8 — GAME ARTS (@GA_Express) December 31, 2017

The Game Awards

Happy New Year! Here’s to a great 2018! pic.twitter.com/5rvgMtzG41 — The Game Awards (@thegameawards) January 1, 2018

GameTomo

Gears of War

genDesign

(Source)

God Eater / Code Vein

Granzella

Gust

Flyhigh Works

Hamster Corporation

Inti Creates

Kadokawa Games

2018 Challenges for God Wars 1. Release “Labyrinth of Yomi” [downloadable content], as well a work that adds further improvements and new elements to the main story. 2. Make Moa Tsukino and Shou Karino very successful as publicity ambassadors.

2018 Challenges for Root Letter 1. Announce a new title. 2. Appoint veteran creators to the scenario and as director.

Kingdom Hearts

Happy Holidays! May happiness and light be yours throughout the coming year! #KH #KingdomHearts pic.twitter.com/0Rqxe8UJOo — Kingdom Hearts (@KINGDOMHEARTS) December 31, 2017

Kingdom Hearts Union χ [Cross]

Happy New Year, keyblade wielders! We are thankful that you're all as amazing as you are! We hope to continue giving you everything you love in #KHUX, so here's to 2018! pic.twitter.com/HLsR1WkaXT — KINGDOM HEARTS UX (@kh_ux_na) January 1, 2018

Kirby

Koei Tecmo Games Europe

Kojima Productions

Happy new year 2018! May it be a great year for all of you. Thanks for all your support; it's what keeps us going! pic.twitter.com/qVZNmeCGI3 — Kojima Productions (@KojiPro2015_EN) December 31, 2017

Layton Series

Let It Die

SENPAI! HAPPY NEW YEAR!!!! pic.twitter.com/XgHgyBDk4c — LET IT DIE The Game (@LETITDIETheGame) January 1, 2018

Level-5

Marvelous’ Kenichiro Takaki

Metal Gear

Mistwalker’s Hironobu Sakaguchi

Monster Hunter Stories

Monster Hunter: World

Natsume

A message from Natsume president and CEO Hiro Maekawa:

Happy New Year to our Worldwide Fans! The year 2017 was a very special and memorable year for us. It was the 20th Anniversary of our Harvest Moon franchise. Taking this opportunity, I would like to share my unforgettable memory about the birth of Harvest Moon with all our loyal Harvest Moon fans. It was 1996 when I first came across an unknown farming simulation game for the SNES. I played the game, and found it very unique and heartwarming, something I had never seen before. My instinct told me that this niche game might have great potential to grow in America, given that America is a large farming country. At the same time, I felt a sense of nostalgia about the game, since I was born and spent my childhood in the countryside of Japan. At that time, I was a newcomer to the video game industry, and I did not know much about the U.S. video game market. So, I decided to check with my associates in the industry to see what they thought about this game. To my shock, all the comments I got were extremely negative! Basically, they said that the game was very boring, there was no excitement, and there would be no market for this type of bland game in the U.S. All the negative comments were understandable in hindsight due to the fact there was no such video game genre as “Farming Simulations” at that time. However, it was my strong intuition that this non-violent, family-oriented game could have a big potential to resonate with fans in this country. Based on this belief, I decided to release, this game and named it Harvest Moon. And this is how Harvest Moon was born twenty years ago! In celebration of Harvest Moon‘s 20th Anniversary, we have developed a new Harvest Moon title, Harvest Moon: Light of Hope. It is the first Harvest Moon title to be multi-platform, as it is for PC (Steam), Nintendo Switch, and Sony PlayStation 4. The PC version of Harvest Moon: Light of Hope was released for Steam in November, and we are very happy with its sales performance thus far. Harvest Moon: Light of Hope for the Switch and PS4 are scheduled to be released early this year, both physical and download. Thanks to the continued support by loyal Harvest Moon fans worldwide, this once-unknown farming simulation game has grown to be one of the best-known family-oriented franchises for gamers of all ages! We sincerely appreciate all those loyal fans for their continued support. We have several other exciting titles coming this year in addition to Harvest Moon: Light of Hope for Switch and PlayStation 4, so please stay tuned! Our company mission for the past 23 years has always been, and will continue to be, to “Make Everyone Happy” with exciting, interactive entertainment software for the entire family. At Natsume, “Everyone” means all of our customers, Natsume employees, and all of the people we work with, such as our development partners, our distribution partner, retailers, financial institutions, media, and all of the people who are directly or indirectly connected with Natsume and our products. We at Natsume are committed to continuing our corporate mission to “Make Everyone Happy,” and we would appreciate your continued support. Wishing “Everyone” a very happy, healthy, and wonderful New Year! Sincerely,

Hiro Maekawa

President & CEO Natsume Inc.

Naughty Dog

2017 has been an incredible year, releasing Uncharted: The Lost Legacy & revealing more on The Last of Us Part II. We wanted to thank you all for the support, passion, & encouragement. We're looking forward to a great 2018 together with you. We love you all. Happy New Year! pic.twitter.com/J2SO3CAsMj — Naughty Dog (@Naughty_Dog) January 1, 2018

Nicalis

What's that, it's 2018? HAPPY NEW YEAR!

Time to make more great games! OH YEAAH!!! pic.twitter.com/xXVKdPr4zK — Nicalis, Inc. (@nicalis) January 2, 2018

Ninja Theory

Happy New Year from everyone at Ninja Theory! Thank you for the incredible support in 2017! pic.twitter.com/jdZxXNMr9P — NinjaTheory (@NinjaTheory) December 31, 2017

Nintendo of America

No Heroes Allowed! VR

Okami

Otomon Drop: Monster Hunter Stories

PlayStation

Happy New Year! It's going to be a great year to play. pic.twitter.com/452k3qziSW — PlayStation (@PlayStation) January 1, 2018

PlayStation Japan

Read a message from Sony Interactive Japan Asia president Atsushi Morita here and PlayStation Blog Japan here.

PM Studios

Happy New year! Best wishes from @MUSYNC_official & PM Studios! Stay tuned for a #2018 filled with surprises and awesome titles! pic.twitter.com/pO5rRtKqjb — PM Studios (@PMStudiosUSA) December 31, 2017

PQube

The team wishes you all a Happy New Year 2018! Please prepare your bodies for the lewd! 😁😘 pic.twitter.com/XLgj8Bgh2n — PQube (@PQubeGames) January 1, 2018

Q-Games

Happy New Year to our friends around the world! pic.twitter.com/3hccdL2YT3 — Q-Games (@PixelJunkNews) January 1, 2018

Quantic Dream

Happy New Year to our TALENTED team working so hard, our WONDERFULL actresses and actors for STUNNING performances, our composers for being so INSPIRING, our BELOVED fans for whom we’ll always go the EXTRA mile and @PlayStation @SonyXDevEurope for always being day one BELIEVERS! pic.twitter.com/sQ6KrHlIFs — Quantic Dream (@QUANTIC_DREAM) December 31, 2017

Quiz Magic Academy: The World Evolve

Retro Studios

Rideon

Sega Japan

SIE Japan Studio

Wishing you a very Happy New Year! from JAPAN Studio pic.twitter.com/glZA5BALkc — SIE JAPAN Studio (@SonyJapanStudio) January 1, 2018

SINoALICE

SNK Entertainment

Sonic the Hedgehog

Happy New Year! pic.twitter.com/KdyfpNemyi — Sonic the Hedgehog (@sonic_hedgehog) January 1, 2018

Spike Chunsoft

Spike Chunsoft’s Kazutaka Kodaka

Splatoon

Square Enix

A letter from Square Enix president Yosuke Matsuda:

I would like to wish everyone a Happy New Year. The environment surrounding the content industry is undergoing significant changes as advancements are made simultaneously in multiple technologies, including AI, xR (VR, AR, MR), next-generation communications systems, and payment infrastructure. As a result of these advances, consumers are likely to enjoy richer content experiences and greater convenience. These environmental changes look poised to gather further momentum going forward, and we expect them to serve as a tailwind for our Group. As such, we will forge ahead with our content development efforts and accelerate the expansion of our global content business. Disruptive technological evolution gains speed In 2017, AI garnered considerable attention globally for its far-reaching disruptive potential, and advancements were made in the commercialization and uptake of xR (VR, AR, MR) technologies. With the Olympic and Paralympic Games set to be held in Tokyo in 2020, Japan is preparing to ramp up its 5G infrastructure build-out. In the near future, this effort should result in mobile networks that provide constant connectivity and support massive data traffic at a low cost. Since HTML5 already enables web browsers to display high-quality 3D on par with native apps, browsers may garner renewed attention as a gaming platform once 5G networks are in place. The expanded application of fintech is also capable of putting emerging market payment infrastructure on par with that of advanced nations in short order. Payment infrastructure is as vital to digital content businesses as is communications infrastructure, so its rapid development should serve as a significant tailwind to the geographic expansion of our Group’s businesses. As these examples illustrate, technological advancements result in new forums for creating content and in new business opportunities. For this reason, they are a major enabler for content producers in their efforts to provide their customers with new experiences. We look for such advancements to gain even further momentum in 2018 and beyond. A richer lineup of digital content platforms Another key feature of the current digital content landscape is the smartphone. Annual global smartphone shipments are now in excess of 1.5 billion units1, making the smartphone an essential device for the enjoyment of digital contents, and the evolution of smartphone technology knows no bounds. In the consumer game console space, March 2017 saw the release of the Nintendo Switch, which has proven a major global success, selling more than 10 million units worldwide. PlayStation 4 has also seen sales of more than 70 million units, and the Xbox One series, which has just added the Xbox One X to its lineup, got off to a good start during the holiday season. These successes present major business opportunities to game publishers and developers. 2017 was also a year in which Japanese game titles represented a significant presence on the global consumer console game market. While the consumer console game market has been solid in the West over the past several years, it has struggled in Japan. However, we expect the Japanese market to gain significant vitality going forward as it joins the overall trend. New amazement and fun for our customers everywhere In 2017, our Group saw results from our ongoing strategy of portfolio expansion as we were able to generate numerous hits with major and mid-sized titles in entertainment content markets around the world. In 2018, we will leverage the aforementioned global acceleration in technological evolution as well as prevailing market trends in order to provide high-quality, highly creative contents so that we can bring new amazement and fun to our customers the world over. We thank you for your continued support in the new year. Yosuke Matsuda

President and Representative Director,

Square Enix Holdings Co., Ltd.

Street Fighter

Sukeban Games

Happy new year! 2017 was amazing and it couldn't have been possible without your support. Thank you so much for everything. Here's for a great fuckin' 2018. New games, new stories. Let's change the world. pic.twitter.com/FHR3RwvInm — Sukeban Games (@SukebanGames) January 1, 2018

Supergiant Games

Happy New Year, folks!! Thank you for helping the Nightwings find their freedom this past year, and may the stars shine on for you in the next one! pic.twitter.com/JsjZYlyDct — Supergiant Games (@SupergiantGames) December 31, 2017

Super Mario Odyssey

Taito

Tamsoft Corporation

Terra Battle

Toybox’s Yasuhiro Wada

Vanillaware

White Owls’ Hidetaka “Swery” Suehiro

World of Final Fantasy

Xbox

Xbox Japan

Xenoblade Chronicles 2