The Disaster Artist is definitely worth seeing. It’s actually worth seeing more than once (which is what I’m going to do because I loved it so much). I haven’t had this much fun in a movie since EVER! James Franco is a spot-on Tommy Wiseau who plays the character Johnny in The Room and James is amazing when he recreates The Disaster Artist scenes from The Room. Because James Franco put in so much dedication to this role, he is a wonderful Tommy and a wonderful director for the movie in general. He even stayed in Tommy’s character when he was directing the movie!

That being said, I think in order to really enjoy this movie, you’ll have had to see The Room first. Trust me, you will enjoy it!!! I saw it for the first time a year ago and I have probably watched it at least 50 times now. Yes, it is an awful movie! But that is WHY it’s good. Tommy Wiseau is absolutely perfect in the movie because you just can’t turn away. James Franco really captures his essence in The Disaster Artist. And, he is now nominated for Golden Globes due to how amazing the movie is.

The Disaster Artist is mainly about the relationship between the two main actors in The Room: Tommy Wiseau and Greg Sestero. And because of this, it is so interesting. They are the weirdest pair of best friends you could imagine! Tommy is so much older than Greg (even though he won’t reveal his age or where he was born haha). This is why they’re weird best friends. This shows that any friendship can flourish regardless of pointless differences. If two people click, they click. It’s as simple as that.

Dave Franco plays Greg Sestero in The Disaster Artist. His performance wasn’t amazing in my opinion, though. James Franco picked him to be Greg because he is his brother, and that is apparent. Even so, the storyline makes up for this. The other actors are decent, but the movie focuses on Tommy and Greg’s relationship.

The scenes that James Franco recreates as Tommy Wiseau are absolutely perfect! He put sooo much into this movie. If you are a James fan and/or a Tommy fan, you will like this movie. I guarantee it!