Beyond the town, down by the bus station next to the old mill was a park, nicknamed Sawmill Park by the old timers. It was here that on the weekends Mae and Gregg would play together if they weren't round each others houses or by the tracks. It was now coming to the end of the first term at Elementary School, meaning that together they had a whole week to get up to mischief and "crimes" which Gregg had nicknamed them. As Candy pulled up and parked, she looked back at Mae and Gregg, sitting in the backseat through the rear view mirror. The two were chatting excitedly and hastily undoing their seat-belts so they could leave. "Calm down you two," she said as she undid hers. As Candy exited the car so did Mae and Gregg, slamming the doors shut much to her dismay. The two kids began to run along the path to the park when Candy shouted after them, "Hang on!" Mae stopped and listened to her mother as Gregg began to unlock the wooden gate. "I'm going to look around for Aunt Molly quickly, just to see if she's doing her rounds currently, will just be a tick, don't wander off and stay within my eyesight!" "Yeeees mum" Mae responded, she tilted her head back as she said this with frustration. When her mum turned away she quickly joined Gregg who shut the gate on her just as she was about to enter. "Not cool Gregg, not cool..." Mae said pulling on the latch. "Last one to the boat is a rotten egg!" Gregg called, already running to the giant structure. The park didn't consist of too much, but its main attraction of it was a large wooden boat, with a climbing frame on top, which Mae had aspired to climb to the top to and then onto the power lines one day, but knew that in order to do that she had to get past the first few rungs of the ladder. Beyond the boat were some different sized logs which grew taller as you walked up them, behind the park there was a small valley where the high school kids like to hang at night, and where the rope swing is. Mae caught up with Gregg at the boat, but by the time she was there he was already climbing. "I beat you!" Gregg called out to her from above, reaching the top of the climbing frame where there was an overlook of the track and all of Possum Springs. "It'snot really fair considering you had a head start!" Mae said as she began to climb. Some uneasiness began to overtake her, she had never made it to the top before but she wasn't going to let Gregg know that, after all she was a cat, and climbing is in her nature. Mae gripped upwards for the grip to pull her up and one by one she climbed not daring to look down. As she was beginning to reach the top she stopped for a moment, taking in what she doing, before pushing on and eventually she had got there in the end. She felt proud of herself for overcoming her fear, it was her first time up at the top and from up there the town looked beautiful. Mae saw Gregg in the corner, reading some of the carving indented onto the wall. "That took you awhile!" he mocked. Mae scrambled over to him. "Shuttup" she said. "What's the matter? Never climbed up here before?" "Well... duh... of course I have, plenty of times, but not with you... with my other friends." "You don't have any other friends Mae," Gregg said jokingly. Mae lightly pushed him before sitting down to join him at what he was looking at. "Anything interesting?" she asked. "Not really, there's that though which is funny!" he said, pointing at what someone had written onto the wood:

CALL HALEY HOROWITZ FOR FUN BUM TIMES!

