Erica Garner, whose father Eric became a national symbol of excessive police force after a fatal struggle with cops on Staten Island, died early Saturday, her family said.

Garner, 27, suffered “major brain damage” from a heart attack last weekend.

She died at Woodhull Hospital of natural causes, said the Rev. Al Sharpton, who noted her family did not remove Garner from life support because her 8-year-old daughter Alyssa wanted to give her a chance to come out of the coma.

Erica Garner became a political activist after her father died in 2014 death when an NYPD officer placed him in a chokehold while arresting him for selling loose cigarettes.

“She has passed,” Sharpton said outside the hospital, with her mother Esaw Snipes-Garner by his side. “Her heart was broken when she didn’t get justice. … The [heart] attack just dealt with the pieces that were left.”

Snipes-Garner noted her daughter was born at the same hospital where she died.

“She was a warrior and a fighter. And she fought till the end. From the day she was born she was a fighter,” Snipes-Garner said, holding back tears. “We’re gonna stay strong as a family and gonna take care of her child and make sure her children know how much she loved them.”

Garner leaves behind two children. Her youngest, a son born in August, is named Eric after her father.

Her daughter Alyssa asked the family to “give her time” on Thursday, Sharpton said at a press conference later Saturday after a rally at his Harlem headquarters.

“Esaw and a couple of us were there by the bed, and the daughter said that she wanted to talk to her mother alone, and we all left, and when the daughter came out, she said to her grandmother Esaw… I want y’all to give her time,” Sharpton said. “She sensed or knew that there was the question of whether to pull the plug as they say or whether to give it time…They decided to wait even though they’d been told there was little brain activity.”

Sharpton said funeral arrangements will be announced later next week. He said Garner’s family, and her two children, will “always” have his National Action Network’s support.

“Her heart was not broken at the hospital,” Sharpton said. “Her heart was broken in a court room that said you can choke her daddy to death on video saying ‘I can’t breathe’ and still get no justice. So the heart attack attacked a broken heart.”

Her death was confirmed on her official Twitter account​, which continued to post memories and photos of Garner on Saturday. ​

“Erica the world loves you. I love you. I am glad you came into our lives. May you find the peace in the next life that you deserved while you were here. I will always love you my sister. love you,” the account tweeted at 9:36 am. “She passed away this morning. The reports are real. We didn’t deserve her.”

“When you report this you remember she was human: mother, daughter, sister, aunt. Her heart was bigger than the world. It really really was. She cared when most people wouldn’t have. She was good. She only pursued right, no matter what. No one gave her justice,” said a follow up tweet at 9:41 a.m.