Buffon hails Harry Kane

By Football Italia staff

Gianluigi Buffon has his eye on the Champions League, but to get there Juventus must beat Tottenham and Harry Kane, “one of the best strikers in Europe.”

The Juventus and Italy goalkeeper spoke to The Daily Mirror newspaper in England as he prepares to turn 40 next month and singled out Spurs hitman Kane.

“Harry is now one of the best strikers in ­Europe – there is no question about that. As a player, you can always work on parts of your game and try to ­improve – but there are some things you can’t teach.

“That natural goal-scoring instinct is for me a talent that you are born with. I have seen over the years with Ronaldo, Cristiano Ronaldo, Pippo Inzaghi, Gabriel Batistuta, they have that natural instinct that can really make goalkeepers suffer – and it’s clear Kane also has that.

“Always in my ­career I have wanted to test myself against the best – and now Harry Kane is one of the best. I have always had the attitude that I don’t fear the best – I respect them – and I always want to play against them.

“That is one of the greatest ­challenges of playing at the highest level, to test yourself against the best players – that is always something I have enjoyed.”

Kane has hit a remarkable 24 goals in 24 competitive games this season, including six in five Champions League appearances.

Buffon has said he is “99 per cent certain” he’ll retire at the end of this season, but could hold off if Juventus win the Champions League, because it’ll give him a chance to play in the Club World Cup.

In order to get there, they first need to get past Tottenham with the first leg of their Round of 16 tie on February 13.

“They are going to be two hard games against Tottenham – we know that. Kane will be a big threat but they are not just Kane.

“As always, it is my dream to win the Champions League – I don’t allow it to be a pressure – but it still remains a big ambition.”

Watch Serie A live in the UK on Premier Sports for just £11.99 per month including live LaLiga, Eredivisie, Scottish Cup Football and more. Visit: https://subscribe.premiersports.tv/