Stanford offense should be strong in ’18 — superb if Bryce Love returns

SAN ANTONIO — Depending on All-America running back Bryce Love’s decision about whether to go to the NFL, Stanford could have one of the best offenses in its history next season.

The thought of a full season of Love and quarterback K.J. Costello, with almost all the wide receivers, tight ends and offensive linemen back, might prompt visions of a Rose Bowl to dance in the heads of Cardinal fans.

Stanford’s offense will be in the hands of a new coordinator, Tavita Pritchard, and head coach David Shaw says he’ll name an offensive line coach who also will serve as running-game coordinator.

While the No. 15 Cardinal licked their wounds from their 39-37 loss to No. 13 TCU in Thursday night’s Alamo Bowl, Shaw indicated that he senses a big improvement on this season’s 9-5 record is in store for 2018.

“I’m so excited, so excited for what we have coming back on this football team,” he said after the game. “And there’s a lot of work to be done and a lot of things that we can improve, and so many areas that we are going to get so much better.”

One of those areas is the pass rush. The Cardinal had 32 sacks, a far cry from the meet-at-the-quarterback gang led by Trent Murphy, Chase Thomas and Ben Gardner that posted a school-record 57 in 2012. The 2018 team won’t need to match that total, but it will have to put more heat on quarterbacks in the Pac-12.

The receiving corps should be especially loaded, beginning with starters JJ Arcega-Whiteside (unless he decides to turn pro after his three-touchdown night in San Antonio) and Trent Irwin and including holdovers Connor Wedington and Donald Stewart. Redshirt freshman Osiris St. Brown and incoming freshman Michael Wilson will join an enticing mix.

Even if Love leaves, the tailback position will be in good hands. Cameron Scarlett averaged 4.3 yards per carry and scored eight touchdowns as the main short-yardage back. He would make a fine featured tailback, backed by Trevor Speights, Dorian Maddox and possibly Wedington, who might have a dual role.

It is believed that backup quarterback Keller Chryst, who has started 13 games, may play elsewhere as a graduate transfer. That would leave the No. 2 role to redshirt freshman Davis Mills while incoming Jack West goes through a redshirt season.

The only other certain and significant offensive losses would be Daniel Marx, a fixture at fullback for four years; versatile offensive lineman David Bright and starting tight end Dalton Schultz. Reagan Williams or Houston Heimuli could succeed Marx. Brandon Fanaika might start at left guard for Bright unless he decides to leave with a year of eligibility left. And Scooter Harrington probably would become the main blocking tight end; Kaden Smith and Colby Parkinson continue mainly as excellent receivers.

An intriguing question in the offensive line is whether tackle Foster Sarell would play. One of the nation’s top recruits in 2017, he played mainly on special teams. But the two starting tackles, Walker Little and A.T. Hall, will return, so one of the tackles might move to guard.

On defense, All-Pac-12 lineman Harrison Phillips is leaving early, and so may two other all-conference picks, safety Justin Reid and cornerback Quenton Meeks. End Eric Cotton departs, leaving just Dylan Jackson from the starting defensive line.

The coaches are counting on Dalyn Wade-Perry, a 6-4, 332-pound freshman tackle, and sophomores Michael Williams, Jovan Swan and Thomas Schaffer to step into the line rotation. Ryan Johnson could make it, too, although he has struggled with injuries through his redshirt season. Even four-star prospects Thomas Booker and Andres Fox could play as freshmen.

Elsewhere in the defense, there are far more experienced players. Joey Alfieri, Casey Toohill, Jordan Fox and Curtis Robinson will make for a strong contingent of outside linebackers even after Peter Kalambayi and Mike Tyler leave.

Inside backer Bobby Okereke looks to be in the mold of former Cardinal standouts Shayne Skov, A.J. Tarpley and Blake Martinez. Sean Barton, a starter who suffered a season-ending knee injury against San Diego State in September, might miss spring ball, but figures prominently in Stanford’s plans for next season. Jordan Perez and Mustafa Branch also will be back.

The newcomer to watch in the secondary is freshman cornerback Paulson Adebo, who combines size (6-foot-1) and speed. He might replace Meeks, if he leaves, or Alijah Holder, if he’s not back from his knee injury. Another promising cornerback is sophomore Obi Eboh. Terrence Alexander may be back if he gets a medical waiver, in which case, he would join holdovers Alameen Murphy and Malik Antoine.

Reid may depart at safety/nickel back, but Frank Buncom and Ben Edwards will return at safety. Brandon Simmons, a special-teams standout, or Denzel Franklin could take Reid’s spot. Another player to watch: Stuart Head, a 6-4 safety.

The special teams should be in excellent shape with Jake Bailey, a terrific punter and kickoff man, and Jet Toner, one of the Pac-12’s best placekickers. Scarlett was second in the conference in kickoff returns (26.0) and had 11 of 30 yards or more, the most in any Power 5 conference.

“So many guys played” Thursday night, Shaw said. “I have a firm belief that when we start next year, you may not recognize them. I think we’re going to make a huge jump, and I think we need to.”

Tom FitzGerald is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: tfitzgerald@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @tomgfitzgerald

Linebacker has non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma

Ryan Beecher, a backup inside linebacker for Stanford, missed the Alamo Bowl on Thursday because he was diagnosed last week with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, he said Friday from his home in Fresno.

Beecher, the MVP in his senior season at San Joaquin Memorial-Fresno and the class valedictorian, said he is due for more tests. The initial scan, he said, indicated his illness is “highly curable,” but he acknowledged, “With a diagnosis like this, it kind of flips your world upside down. But I got very good news about my marker.”

Beecher, 21, a redshirt sophomore, played on special teams this season and had three tackles. He did not make the trip to San Antonio because of his illness. He said he told his teammates about it before they left. During the game, many of the players wrote his jersey number 43 on their arms or, in the case of wide receiver JJ Arcega-Whiteside, his neck.

“I was incredibly touched by the support my team showed,” Beecher said.

The American Cancer Society says non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma is a cancer that starts in white blood cells called lymphocytes, part of the body’s immune system.

Beecher’s father, Jim, said Ryan will be examined by a Stanford oncologist Tuesday. “We’re confident he’ll be cured. He’s looking forward to returning to football.”

— Tom FitzGerald