Before turning off the mic for Christmas break last Friday, “The Big Voice on the Right” went on the record with three big predictions about the 2018 election and some general prognostications about the Left’s narratives — all of which would be welcome developments for conservatives.

In their desperation to take down Donald Trump, the Democrats and their drive-by counterparts have convinced themselves that they’ve already won the midterms, but all they’ve really done, Rush Limbaugh suggested, is walked themselves out onto a “plank.”

“I’m gonna go on record December 22, 2017: Based on all that is known now, the Republican Party is not gonna lose control of the House, they’re not gonna lose control of the Senate — and, in fact, the Democrats may lose even more seats in the Senate,” said Limbaugh. “They’re getting so far ahead of themselves that they’re out walking a plank, and they have no idea how thin and precariously balanced it is.”

The narratives the Left are counting on to give them the election — like the crumbling Russia collusion narrative and the supposed tax reform fallout — explained Limbaugh, will end up backfiring. The “collusion” narrative is already in shambles, he said.

“If there was any collusion, it was between Hillary and the Democrats and the DOJ and the FBI with a tinge of Russia thrown in with the Trump dossier, and this doesn’t take any detective work,” said Rush. “They have as much as admitted this in books written about the Clinton campaign, the Trump dossier and how that was commissioned. And the fact that all of these deep state people have been lying and making up these quotes for a full year about Russian collusion with no evidence whatsoever. There’s no doubt in any of our minds what’s really been going on here.”

Meanwhile, as more Americans come to see the positive economic and personal impact of the Republicans’ tax reform bill, all those polls the left-leaning media have cited as evidence that Americans hate it, will prove to be as empty as those predicting that Hillary would trounce Trump.

“They’re repeating almost verbatim the same mistakes,” said Limbaugh. “They’ve already got Trump beaten. I told you earlier this week: They think they’ve won the House back, and they’re gonna be campaigning on two things. They’re gonna be campaigning on this tax bill. They think they can really make points by criticizing the Republicans for letting you keep more of your money. The Democrats think there’s some election to be won by promising to take your money back and giving it to Washington so that we can repay what the government has been heisted.”

In response to CBS’ John Dickerson reading bad poll numbers for the GOP tax bill, Limbaugh said the media is “not looking at that the right way.”

“You drove those numbers down, Dickerson! You are the reason that people have such a low opinion of the tax cut bill,” said Rush. “But once it is implemented and once the growth happens and once the personal income starts rising, what do you think’s gonna happen to those poll numbers, Mr. Dickerson? You’ve driven ’em down so low there’s only one way they can go. This tax cut can only become more popular in the polls.”

The media, he added later, “has been telling everybody their taxes are going up, and people have believed it. The fact is 80% of taxpayers are going to get a tax cut. Eighty percent of Americans, 80% of people who pay taxes are gonna get a massive tax rate reduction. The last famous Democrat that ran for office promising to raise your taxes was Walter F. Mondull in 1984. He lost in a 49-state landslide.”

After playing a soundbite of CBS’ Susan Page declaring that “engagement by women voters” is part of the reason Republicans’ prospects look so grim for 2018, Limbaugh asked his audience how many actually believe it.

“[W]e’re to believe that they’re really mad at Trump, that women voters really hate Trump,” he said. “And those voters are gonna drive the midterm elections, and throw Trump out of office in 2020 and the Republicans out of the House and Senate in 2018. … Weren’t these all the same people who thought Hillary was gonna win the presidency? Weren’t these the same people who believed all the polling data that said that Hillary was gonna win the presidency?”

RELATED: Rush Limbaugh Explains Why Democrats Are In PANIC Over GOP’s Huge Tax Win

Partial transcript via RushLimbaugh.com