A Mexican police chief believed to be working with drug cartels by providing protection was arrested along with two officers.

A press release from the state prosecutors office reports that the chief of police from Namiquipa, Chihuahua, and two police officers were arrested during an operation carried out by agents of the state attorney general’s office after an investigation revealed the three were providing protection to Arturo Quintana Quintana, “El 80”. Quintana is a top leader within the Juarez Cartel, according to local media reports.

At the time of their arrests, they were found in possession of five long rifles that are classified for the exclusive use of the armed forces; three handguns; tactical equipment; ammo; a significant quantity of crystal amphetamine; and a vehicle that was illegally in the country.

Namiquipa is approximately 125 miles west of the state capital of Chihuahua and is in the path of what is considered a key drug smuggling route into the United States. The region has been plagued by violence as the Sinaloa Cartel seeks to displace Nuevo Cartel de Juárez (NCDJ) that maintains control of western Chihuahua. The violent confrontations are occurring between members of La Linea–the armed wing of the Juarez Cartel–and La Gente Nueva—loyal to the Sinaloa Cartel.

“El 80” is considered a top priority target for law enforcement since much of the cartel violence is attributed to his organization. Quintana is also listed as a wanted fugitive by the U.S. Department of Justice for various drug trafficking and smuggling charges in connection with the Juarez Cartel.

Breitbart Texas previously reported on Quintana’s criminal activities. He was originally believed to be responsible for the high profile murder of journalist Miroslava Breach but in October, the state attorney general’s office identified members of La Gente Nueva within the Sinaloa Cartel as the responsible party, according to media reports.

The three detainees were placed at the disposal of the federal authorities, who will take the lead of the investigation with assistance from the state attorney general’s office.

Robert Arce is a retired Phoenix Police detective with extensive experience working Mexican organized crime and street gangs. Arce has worked in the Balkans, Iraq, Haiti, and recently completed a three-year assignment in Monterrey, Mexico, working out of the Consulate for the United States Department of State, International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Program, where he was the Regional Program Manager for Northeast Mexico (Coahuila, Tamaulipas, Nuevo Leon, Durango, San Luis Potosi, Zacatecas.)