Tonight against the Memphis Grizzlies, Stephen Curry made 10 three-pointers, a season high for the entire league, and they came impressively in the flow of the normal Warriors offense. I mean, the guy only took 17 shots!

One of the highlights was a between-the-legs pass from Pachulia for a corner 3. I asked him about this in our interview a couple weeks ago (you should read the whole thing, part 1 and part 2):

EA: I've noticed that you've been passing the ball between your legs a lot this year. Is that something you're doing just for the joy of it, or is there a basketball reason? What do the coaches think? ZP: The true basketball reason, honestly, is I find it easier to release the ball a little earlier, and then I have time to set a good screen on my guy, you know whoever my guy is coming off. So, at the same time, fans like it. [laughs] I don't know. People like it, and they'll put it on social media. But I'm not trying to be fancy or anything. I'm trying to stay disciplined and be who I am and play this game the right way. So, who cares how you pass it between your legs, the handoff, or overhead. As long as the ball gets delivered to the right guy at the right place and it leads to an easy shot. That's what it's about. It looks fancy out there, because not everyone is doing it, but for me I'm just happy to get my guy open with a wide open shot.

Video Breakdown

Here is a video breakdown of how Steph Curry got his threes. Co-starring Kevin Durant and Klay Thompson. Zaza Pachulia Airlines and Nick Young prancing optional.

Steph's 10 Threes Watch how Steph Curry got his 10 three pointers against Memphis. Co-starring Kevin Durant and Klay Thompson. Zaza Airlines and Nick Young prancing optional. By Eric Apricot. Posted by Golden State of Mind on Saturday, December 30, 2017

(alternate YouTube link)

Final Thoughts

By my count, this is the 9th career game ever with 10 threes by Stephen Curry #NBAVote. Without peeking, name the two players with 3 career games. (18 other players have done it one time.)https://t.co/AditDgaT1r — Eric Apricot (@EricApricot) December 31, 2017

Wait, Steph had zero turnovers? That’s probably rarer than 10 threes for him. — Eric Apricot (@EricApricot) December 31, 2017