Ishrat Jahan, who was one of the five litigators who went to court against Instant Triple Talaq has joined the Bharatiya Janata Party. On presence of party leaders, she joined Bengal BJP on Saturday, reports ABP. She was instrumental in the long struggle against Triple Talaq which finally lead to SC calling it as unconstitutional. Now, the Centre has passed a bill in Lok Sabha, which seeks to give three years jail to any Muslim man giving instant triple talaq to his wife.

On Saturday, Ishrat Jahan joined BJP and said that she had supported the party on the question of Triple Talaq. According to Ishrat, that finally prompted her to join the saffron party. BJP Mahila Morcha President Locket Chatterjee said that Ishrat is going through a financial crisis and they will urge the Central government to give her a job. Locket alleged that the state government hasn't extended any hep to Ishrat Jahan, who spearheaded such a historic movement. Locket felicitated Ishrat Jahan after she joined BJP.

Ishrat earlier said that her life has become worse after the verdict . Speaking to DNA at her home on Nando Ghosh Road, in Howrah district, Ishrat said that the apex court verdict has proved to be more of a bane as she had been socially ostracised and there is a growing sense of insecurity about her future. "It has been the loneliest Eid-ul-Adha (Bakri Eid) for me," she says from her 7 feet x 10 feet room. "No one came over for the customary embrace and exchange of greetings. Since the day of the judgement, the only good thing that has happened is that the electricity connection, which was cut, had been restored. My in-laws want me to withdraw the case and some neighbours are threatening me because they think I have spoken against the Muslim religious law."

She said the media attention has gone against her, and she has had to drop her customary naqab or veil to fence off imposters. "Strangers throng my house as if I am a tourist attraction," she said. "I used to put on a naqab, but then someone from the locality pretended to be me and gave an interview to the media. If an imposter makes any loose comment, I will have to bear the brunt. That is why I have decided to come out of the veil."