Get the biggest politics stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Theresa May is reportedly planning to axe up to a quarter of her Cabinet in the next few weeks as she tries to cling to power.

Five of her 21 Cabinet ministers have been tipped for the sack and others could be shunted to new roles, it is claimed.

She repeatedly held on to her current line-up this year amid fears a shake-up would destabilise her vulnerable position.

But her leadership has been buoyed by securing a first-round Brexit deal with the EU.

And she will be forced to act because the Cabinet Office position she sacked ally Damian Green from is still vacant.

Now Education Secretary Justine Greening, Tory chairman Patrick McLoughlin, Commons Leader Andrea Leadsom and Transport Secretary Chris Grayling are all tipped for the chop.

(Image: Getty Images)

(Image: PA)

The four ministers are named by both the Sun on Sunday and the Sunday Times. The latter adds Business Secretary Greg Clark is tipped to lose his job.

It's also reported that Boris Johnson could be asked to take up a 'supercharged Brexit delivery job' in the business department.

But his allies told the Sunday Times this would be a demotion that he would fight.

Those tipped for promotions include Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt, who could take Damian Green's place.

Others who could reportedly be promoted include Dominic Raab, Damian Hinds and Brandon Lewis.

Sources told the two newspapers a reshuffle is due in January 2018.

The ministers involved have serious controversies to their name.

Sir Patrick enraged Tories when a prankster was able to hand a P45 to the Prime Minister at her conference speech in Manchester, which happened under his watch.

(Image: Getty Images Europe)

(Image: Daily Mirror)

(Image: Splash News and Pictures)

Mr Grayling has faced calls to quit today from former infrastructure tsar Lord Adonis over a "bailout" to private firms running the East Coast rail line.

Ms Leadsom, who stood for the leadership against the PM, has been accused of positioning herself prominently including turning up to the site of the Grenfell Tower fire when Mrs May failed to.

The briefings themselves could spark a damaging battle in Mrs May's Cabinet just as they resume talks on the 'end state' of Brexit.

David Cameron 's former spin doctor Craig Oliver warned: "Aides briefing on reshuffles causes mayhem - angry ministers start demanding private reassurances and counter-briefing begins.

"Soon someone asks: are we sure we *really* want to do this?"