Welcome to the future of motorsports – the definitive motor racing experience is back and better than ever only on PlayStation 4.

Gran Turismo Sport is the world’s first racing experience to be built from the ground up to bring global, online competitions sanctioned by the highest governing body of international motorsports, the FIA (Federation International Automobile). Create your legacy as you represent and compete for your home country or favorite manufacturer through multiple race class, including GT3, Prototype, Rally, and more.

VR Optional: Supports most vehicles and all tracks in dedicated PS VR Mode.

PlayStation VR is not for use by children under age 12.

This item includes some VR content. PlayStation VR and PlayStation Camera are required to experience VR functionality.

VR Games may cause some players to experience motion sickness.

Graphics

Achieving 4K*, 60FPS, HDR**, with Wide Colour Process

Compatible with the best imaging technologies available today, providing 4K, 60fps, HDR and Wide Color. Not only has the output been made to support HDR TV signal formats, a True HDR workflow was specially established in order to maintain true HDR and wide color processing from the initial material capturing processes to the final output. The development actually started with the development of an HDR wide color capture device in cooperation with the Sony Corporation.

As a result, not only is the output compatible with HDR TV’s, the images produced achieves a level of realism never seen before, even when viewed on a conventional TV.

* A PlayStation 4 Pro and a 4K compatible TV is required to enjoy 4K images.

** An HDR compatible TV is required to enjoy HDR.

Sound

A true to life audio experience, where you can even hear the wavering of torque in the drivetrain

The interior of a car is filled with a variety of sounds, including engine sounds, transmission noise, exhaust sound, road noise, wind noise and more. In Gran Turismo Sport, not only are real world cars are bench tested and recorded in optimal environments, a sound simulator has been developed in collaboration with the audio technology department of Sony Corp in order to recreate an ‘optimal sound’ that even takes into account the mechanism behind human aural recognition.

Cars

From stock cars, race cars to concept cars, a total of over 150 cars have been recreated for the tame.

Excluding the CAD data used by automobile makers for their manufacturing, the 3D models created for the game are the highest quality, highest precision models in the world. From the curves of the body, edges, spacing between body panels to the headlights and turn signals, every detail of the car has been precisely recreated.

Tracks

From high speed ovals to an urban expressway, 17 locations are provided with 40 different layouts.

From popular real life race circuits, oval tracks, dirt tracks set in nature and an urban expressway based on public roads, a large variety of tracks have been provided in game.

The True HDR workflow has enabled the recreation of light and colors that is true to nature, and it is possible to drive the tracks in a large variety of daylight and sky conditions.

Assist Features

High level driving assist features for anyone to enjoy

Gran Turismo Sport contains auto driving features that allow you to leave the brake and steering controls to the AI. Even those who are driving cars for the very first time can drive with confidence.

The high level driving assist aids in steering, throttle control, brakes, and stability control, etc., and each of these can be turned ON or OFF to match the skill level of the player.

Physics Simulator

The best automotive simulation in GT series history, balancing both realism and ease of driving

In parallel to the development of its vehicle physics simulation, Gran Turismo has performed technical support for cars racing in the real life Nürburgring 24 hour race as well as the LMP1 class of the Le Mans 24 hour race.

Gran Turismo Sport is equipped with the latest vehicle physics simulation that includes knowledge gained from both the real and the virtual. A physics simulation that is ‘easy to drive because it is realistic’ has been achieved.

Brand Central

Getting cars. Knowing the brands

Brand Central is a new portal for discovering brands. You can of course purchase cars here from a particular brand, but in the Brand Central you can also see the history of these brands from their birth until present day, and even enjoy premium movies made by each of these companies.

Arcade & Open Lobby

Enjoy quick and easy race customization

The Arcade mode where you can enjoy time trials and racing against the AI has gotten even better. Custom races have been added, allowing you to set your own rules. And of course there is a lobby where you can race freely with online friends. You can make your own room to host races, as well as participate or spectate races hosted by other players.

Sport Mode

Designing the next 100 years of Motorsports

The Sport mode is the future of online racing, proposed by the FIA (Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile) and Gran Turismo. The ‘Advanced Matchmaking System’ matches players with the same level of skill and sportsmanship together, and the BoP (Balance of Performance) will equalize the performance of the race machines, creating a fair and exciting motorsport in an online environment.

Campaign

4 modes to learn driving and enjoy races

By taking part in 4 different modes with different objectives including the Driving School where you learn skills for racing, and the Mission Challenge introducing the joy of racing, you're sure to be enthralled by the depth of car racing and driving before you know it. Real life video tutorials are provided for the missions, allowing you to learn strategy for the more difficult challenges. Even beginner racers will learn to progress through the lessons with ease.

‘Scapes’, the New World of Photography

Go on a photography trip with your favorite car.

The ‘Scapes’ feature is a new format of photography, borne from a True HDR workflow and physics based rendering technologies. Each photo spot contains all the light energy information of that scene as data. Even the incredible brightness of the Sun is physically recorded and contained in each of these photos; and because each image also contains spacial information for that scene, it is now possible to ‘place’ cars into real world photographs.

Livery Editor

Designing the car’s exterior

The ‘livery’ refers to the body colors and designs on the outside of race cars. The highly functional livery editor of Gran Turismo Sport allows the player to freely design the exteriors of their cars. From stock cars to race cars, possibilities for exterior designs are limitless, and these newly created designs can be seen and shared with other players in the game.

Social Features

A communication space between friends, expanding through cars and driving

A variety of rich social features for connecting with friends has been prepared, including a gallery in which you can display content you have created, and a timeline of you and your friends’ activities. A variety of information including replays, photos, livery sets and decals can be shared between friends. The social feature can also be accessed and enjoyed from the gran-turismo.com website as well as through the companion app for smartphones.

VR*DRIVE

Realism of the driver's seat

The game is compatible with the PS VR, providing the user a 360 degree 3D environment to experience. There is a dedicated VR Drive mode in the Arcade Mode where you can drive one on one races as though you are really sitting in the driver seat, surrounded by a real car interior.

* PlayStation VR is required to enjoy the VR feature.