Chevron announced more layoffs are coming to the San Joaquin Valley Business Unit on Monday.

On Dec. 11, Chevron said 122 employees received notice that their positions will be eliminated next year. This comes after the company's San Joaquin Valley Business Unit (SJVBU) announced a cut to 26% of employees based in that unit as part of a new organizational model.

RELATED: Chevron announces more cuts in Kern County

Chevron said around 300 layoffs will occur in phases between now and the end of next year. The first layoff notifications went to 100 employees on Nov. 30.

All SJVBU field and office locations are affected, including the field and office locations in Kern, Fresno and Monterey Counties. Chevron said about 80% of those laid off will be eligible for positions at other Chevron locations in 2018. Some employees may receive severance pay, educational assistance and career transitional services, Chevron said.

The full statement from Chevron:

In October 2017, Chevron's San Joaquin Valley Business Unit (SJVBU) announced a new organizational model that will result in a 26% reduction in employees who are based in SJVBU. The reduction applies across all SJVBU field and office locations, including the filed and office locations in Kern County, Fresno County and Monterey County. The position reductions will occur in a phased approach between now and the end of 2018. The first termination notifications as part of this reorganization were provided to over 100 employees on November 30, 2017 with the elimination of those positions scheduled for January 2018. Today, an additional 122 employees received notification that their positions will be eliminated, with approximately 80% of those individuals remaining eligible to pursue positions at other Chevron locations in 2018. The departure of these employees from SJVBU will be staggered throughout 2018. Eligible employees may receive severance pay, educational assistance, and career transitional services.

It is estimated that approximately 300 employee positions across the three counties in which SJVBU operates will be eliminated over the course of 2018 as part of this reorganization. However, eligible SJVBU employees will have the opportunity to pursue positions at other Chevron locations in 2018. Recently, Chevron has successfully placed approximately 100 employees in positions at other Chevron locations.

RELATED: Chevron looking to cut Bakersfield workforce by 237 employees